<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Addenda</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-3-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Addenda</h3>
				<p>P. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg104">104</a>. <em>The sacred precinct of Pelops at Olympia.</em>⁠—It deserves to be noted that just as Pelops, whose legend reflects the origin of the chariot-race, had his sacred precinct and probably his tomb at Olympia, in like manner Endymion, whose legend reflects the origin of the footrace,<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-763" id="noteref-3-763" epub:type="noteref">763</a> had his tomb at the end of the Olympic stadium, at the point where the runners started in the race.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-764" id="noteref-3-764" epub:type="noteref">764</a> This presence at Olympia of the graves of the two early kings, whose names are associated with the origin of the footrace and of the chariot-race respectively, can hardly be without significance; it indicates the important part played by the dead in the foundation of the Olympic games.</p>
				<p>P. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg188">188</a>. <em>A man is literally reborn in the person of his son.</em>⁠—This belief in the possible rebirth of the parent in the child may sometimes explain the seemingly widespread dislike of people to have children like themselves. Examples of such a dislike have met us in a former part of this work.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-765" id="noteref-3-765" epub:type="noteref">765</a> A similar superstition prevails among the Papuans of Doreh Bay in Dutch New Guinea. When a son resembles his father or a daughter resembles her mother closely in features, these savages fear that the father or mother will soon die.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-766" id="noteref-3-766" epub:type="noteref">766</a> Again, in the island of Savou, to the southwest of Timor, if a child at birth is thought to be like its father or mother, it may not remain under the parental roof, else the person whom it resembles would soon die.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-767" id="noteref-3-767" epub:type="noteref">767</a> Such superstitions, it is obvious, might readily suggest the expedient of killing the child in order to save the life of the parent.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
