<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Hegel on Magic and Religion</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Hegel on Magic and Religion</h3>
				<p>My friend Professor James Ward has pointed out to me that the view which I have taken of the nature and historical relations of magic and religion was anticipated by Hegel in his <i>Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion</i>.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-1446" id="noteref-1-1-1446" epub:type="noteref">1446</a> So far as I understand the philosopher’s exposition, the agreement between us amounts to this: we both hold that in the mental evolution of humanity an age of magic preceded an age of religion, and that the characteristic difference between magic and religion is that, whereas magic aims at controlling nature directly, religion aims at controlling it indirectly through the mediation of a powerful supernatural being or beings to whom man appeals for help and protection. That I take to be the substance of Hegel’s meaning in the following passages which I extract from his lectures on the philosophy of religion.</p>
				<p>Speaking of what he calls the religion of nature he observes: “Fear of the powers of nature, of the sun, of thunderstorms, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, is here not as yet fear which might be called religious fear, for this has its seat in freedom. The fear of God is a different fear from the fear of natural forces. It is said that ‘fear is the beginning of wisdom’; this fear cannot present itself in immediate religion. It first appears in man when he knows himself to be powerless in his particularity, when his particularity trembles within him.⁠ ⁠… It is not, however, fear in this higher sense only that is not present here, but even the fear of the powers of nature, so far as it enters at all at this first stage of the religion of nature, changes round into its opposite, and becomes magic.</p>
				<p>“The absolutely primary form of religion, to which we give the name of magic, consists in this, that the Spiritual is the ruling power over nature. This spiritual element does not yet exist, however, as Spirit; it is not yet found in its universality, but is merely the particular, contingent, empirical self-consciousness of man, which, although it is only mere passion, knows itself to be higher in its self-consciousness than nature⁠—knows that it is a power ruling over nature.⁠ ⁠… This power is a direct power over nature in general, and is not to be likened to the indirect power, which we exercise by means of implements over natural objects in their separate forms.⁠ ⁠… Here the power over nature acts in a direct way. It thus is magic or sorcery.</p>
				<p>“As regards the external mode in which this idea actually appears, it is found in a form which implies that this magic is what is highest in the self-consciousness of those peoples. But in a subordinate way magic steals up to higher standpoints too, and insinuates itself into higher religions, and thus into the popular conception of witches, although in that form it is recognised as something which is partly impotent, and partly improper and godless.</p>
				<p>“There has been an inclination on the part of some (as, for example, in the Kantian philosophy) to consider prayer too as magic, because man seeks to make it effectual, not through mediation, but by starting direct from Spirit. The distinction here, however, is that man appeals to an absolute will, for which even the individual or unit is an object of care, and which can either grant the prayer or not, and which in so acting is determined by general purposes of good. Magic, however, in the general sense, simply amounts to this⁠—that man has the mastery as he is in his natural state, as possessed of passions and desires.</p>
				<p>“Such is the general character of this primal and wholly immediate standpoint, namely, that the human consciousness, any definite human being, is recognised as the ruling power over nature in virtue of his own will. The natural has, however, by no means that wide range which it has in our idea of it. For here the greater part of nature still remains indifferent to man, or is just as he is accustomed to see it. Everything is stable. Earthquakes, thunderstorms, floods, animals, which threaten him with death, enemies, and the like, are another matter. To defend himself against these recourse is had to magic.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-1447" id="noteref-1-1-1447" epub:type="noteref">1447</a> Such is the oldest mode of religion, the wildest, most barbarous form.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“By recent travellers, such as Captain Parry, and before him Captain Ross, this religion has been found among the Eskimo, wholly without the element of mediation and as the crudest consciousness. Among other peoples a mediation is already present.</p>
				<p>“Captain Parry says of them​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-1448" id="noteref-1-1-1448" epub:type="noteref">1448</a>: ‘… They have not the slightest idea of Spirit, of a higher existence, of an essential substance as contrasted with their empirical mode of existence.⁠ ⁠… On the other hand, they have amongst them individuals whom they call <i>Angekoks</i>, magicians, conjurers. Those assert that they have it in their power to raise a storm, to create a calm, to bring whales near, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and say that they learnt these arts from old <i>Angekoks</i>. The people regard them with fear; in every family, however, there is at least one. A young <i>Angekok</i> wished to make the wind rise, and he proceeded to do it by dint of phrases and gestures. These phrases had no meaning and were directed toward no Supreme Being as a medium, but were addressed in an immediate way to the natural object over which the <i>Angekok</i> wished to exercise power; he required no aid from anyone whatever.’⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“This religion of magic is very prevalent in Africa, as well as among the Mongols and Chinese; here, however, it is no longer found in the absolute crudeness of its first form, but mediations already come in, which owe their origin to the fact that the Spiritual has begun to assume an objective form for self-consciousness.</p>
				<p>“In its first form this religion is more magic than religion; it is in Africa among the negroes that it prevails most extensively.⁠ ⁠… In this sphere of magic the main principle is the direct domination of nature by means of the will, of self-consciousness⁠—in other words that Spirit is something of a higher kind than nature. However bad this magic may look regarded in one aspect, still in another it is higher than a condition of dependence upon nature and fear of it.⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“Such, then, is the very first form of religion, which cannot indeed as yet be properly called religion. To religion essentially pertains the moment of objectivity, and this means that spiritual power shows itself as a mode of the Universal relatively to self-consciousness, for the individual, for the particular empirical consciousness. This objectivity is an essential characteristic, on which all depends. Not until it is present does religion begin, does a God exist, and even in the lowest condition there is at least a beginning of it. The mountain, the river, is not in its character as this particular mass of earth, as this particular water, the Divine, but as a mode of the existence of the Divine, of an essential, universal Being. But we do not yet find this in magic as such. It is the individual consciousness as this particular consciousness, and consequently the very negation of the Universal, which is what has the power here; not a god in the magician, but the magician himself is the conjurer and conqueror of nature.⁠ ⁠… Out of magic the religion of magic is developed.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-1449" id="noteref-1-1-1449" epub:type="noteref">1449</a></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
