<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Note: Not to Step Over Persons and Things​</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Note: Not to Step Over Persons and Things​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-2-1552" id="noteref-2-1552" epub:type="noteref">1552</a></h3>
				<p>The superstition that harm is done to a person or thing by stepping over him or it is very widely spread. Thus the Galelareese think that if a man steps over your fishing-rod or your arrow, the fish will not bite when you fish with that rod, and the game will not be hit by that arrow when you shoot it. They say it is as if the implements merely skimmed past the fish or the game.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1553" id="noteref-2-1553" epub:type="noteref">1553</a> Similarly, if a Highland sportsman saw a person stepping over his gun or fishing-rod, he presumed but little on that day’s diversion.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1554" id="noteref-2-1554" epub:type="noteref">1554</a> When a Dacota had bad luck in hunting, he would say that a woman had been stepping over some part of the animal which he revered.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1555" id="noteref-2-1555" epub:type="noteref">1555</a> Amongst many South African tribes it is considered highly improper to step over a sleeper; if a wife steps over her husband he cannot hit his enemy in war; if she steps over his assegais, they are from that time useless, and are given to boys to play with.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1556" id="noteref-2-1556" epub:type="noteref">1556</a> The Baganda think that if a woman steps over a man’s weapons, they will not aim straight and will not kill, unless they have been first purified.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1557" id="noteref-2-1557" epub:type="noteref">1557</a> The Nandi of British East Africa hold that to step over a snare or trap is to court death and must be avoided at all risks; further, they are of opinion that if a man were to step over a pot, he would fall to pieces whenever the pot were broken.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1558" id="noteref-2-1558" epub:type="noteref">1558</a> The people of the Lower Congo deem that to step over a person’s body or legs will cause ill-luck to that person and they are careful not to do so, especially in passing men who are holding a palaver. At such times a passerby will shuffle his feet along the ground without lifting them in order that he may not be charged with bringing bad luck on anyone.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1559" id="noteref-2-1559" epub:type="noteref">1559</a> On the other hand among the Wajagga of East Africa grandchildren leap over the corpse of their grandfather, when it is laid out, expressing a wish that they may live to be as old as he.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1560" id="noteref-2-1560" epub:type="noteref">1560</a> In Laos hunters are careful never to step over their weapons.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1561" id="noteref-2-1561" epub:type="noteref">1561</a> The Tepehuanes of Mexico believe that if anybody steps over them, they will not be able to kill another deer in their lives.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1562" id="noteref-2-1562" epub:type="noteref">1562</a> Some of the Australian aborigines are seriously alarmed if a woman steps over them as they lie asleep on the ground.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1563" id="noteref-2-1563" epub:type="noteref">1563</a> In the tribes about Maryborough in Queensland, if a woman steps over anything that belongs to a man he will throw it away.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1564" id="noteref-2-1564" epub:type="noteref">1564</a> In New Caledonia it is thought to endanger a canoe if a woman steps over the cable.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1565" id="noteref-2-1565" epub:type="noteref">1565</a> Everything that a Samoyed woman steps over becomes unclean and must be fumigated.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1566" id="noteref-2-1566" epub:type="noteref">1566</a> Malagasy porters believe that if a woman strides over their poles, the skin will certainly peel off the shoulders of the bearers when next they take up the burden.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1567" id="noteref-2-1567" epub:type="noteref">1567</a> The Cherokees fancy that to step over a vine causes it to wither and bear no fruit.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1568" id="noteref-2-1568" epub:type="noteref">1568</a> The Ba-Pendi and Ba-thonga of South Africa think that if a woman steps over a man’s legs, they will swell and he will not be able to run.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1569" id="noteref-2-1569" epub:type="noteref">1569</a> According to the South Slavonians, the most serious maladies may be communicated to a person by stepping over him, but they can afterwards be cured by stepping over him in the reverse direction.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1570" id="noteref-2-1570" epub:type="noteref">1570</a> The belief that to step over a child hinders it from growing is found in France, Belgium, Germany, Austria, and Syria; in Syria, Germany, and Bohemia the mischief can be remedied by stepping over the child in the opposite direction.<a href="endnotes-2.xhtml#note-2-1571" id="noteref-2-1571" epub:type="noteref">1571</a></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
