<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc57" name="toc57"/>
				<a id="pdf58" name="pdf58"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Note. The Crucifixion Of Christ.</span><a href="#note_920" id="noteref_920" name="noteref_920">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">920</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</h1>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The mockery of Christ compared to the mockery of the King of the Saturnalia.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">An eminent scholar has recently pointed out the remarkable resemblance between the treatment of Christ by the Roman soldiers at Jerusalem and the treatment of the mock king of the Saturnalia by the Roman soldiers at Durostorum; and he would explain the similarity by supposing that the soldiers ridiculed the claims of Christ to a divine kingdom by arraying him in the familiar garb of old King Saturn, whose quaint person figured so prominently at the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page413">[pg 413]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg413" name="Pg413"/> winter revels.<a href="#note_921" id="noteref_921" name="noteref_921"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">921</span></span></a> Even if the theory should prove to be right, we can hardly suppose that Christ played the part of the regular Saturn of the year, since at the beginning of our era the Saturnalia fell at midwinter, whereas Christ was crucified at the Passover in spring. There is, indeed, as I have pointed out, some reason to think that when the Roman year began in March the Saturnalia was held in spring, and that in remote districts the festival always continued to be celebrated at the ancient date. If the Roman garrison of Jerusalem conformed to the old fashion in this respect, it seems not quite impossible that their celebration of the Saturnalia may have coincided with the Passover; and that thus Christ, as a condemned criminal, may have been given up to them to make sport with as the Saturn of the year. But on the other hand it is rather unlikely that the officers, as representatives of the State, would have allowed their men to hold the festival at any but the official date; even in the distant town of Durostorum we saw that the Roman soldiers celebrated the Saturnalia in December. Thus if the legionaries at Jerusalem really intended to mock Christ by treating him like the burlesque king of the Saturnalia, they probably did so only by way of a jest which was in more senses than one unseasonable.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The mockery of Christ compared to the mockery of the King of the Sacaea.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But closely as the passion of Christ resembles the treatment of the mock king of the Saturnalia, it resembles still more closely the treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea.<a href="#note_922" id="noteref_922" name="noteref_922"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">922</span></span></a> The description of the mockery by St. Matthew is the fullest. It runs thus: <span class="tei tei-q">“Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered him to be crucified. Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers. And they stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe. And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before him, and mocked him, saying, Hail, King of the Jews! And they spit upon him, and took the reed, and smote him on the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page414">[pg 414]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg414" name="Pg414"/> head. And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.”</span><a href="#note_923" id="noteref_923" name="noteref_923"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">923</span></span></a> Compare with this the treatment of the mock king of the Sacaea, as it is described by Dio Chrysostom: <span class="tei tei-q">“They take one of the prisoners condemned to death and seat him upon the king's throne, and give him the king's raiment, and let him lord it and drink and run riot and use the king's concubines during these days, and no man prevents him from doing just what he likes. But afterwards they strip and scourge and crucify him.”</span><a href="#note_924" id="noteref_924" name="noteref_924"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">924</span></span></a> Now it is quite possible that this remarkable resemblance is after all a mere coincidence, and that Christ was executed in the ordinary way as a common malefactor; but on the other hand there are so many scattered hints and indications of something unusual, so many broken lines seemingly converging towards the cross on Calvary, that it is worth while to follow them up and see where they lead us. In attempting to draw these fragmentary data together, to bridge the chasms, and to restore the shattered whole, we must beware of mistaking hypothesis for the facts which it only professes to cement; yet even if our hypothesis should be thought to bear a somewhat undue proportion to the facts, the excess may perhaps be overlooked in consideration of the obscurity and the importance of the enquiry.</p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">At Purim the Jews may have annually put to death a man in the character of Haman, and Christ may have perished in that character. But the Passover, at which Christ was crucified, fell a month after Purim. Perhaps the annual Haman, like the annual Saturn, was allowed a month's license before being put to death.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">We have seen reason to think that the Jewish festival of Purim is a continuation, under a changed name, of the Babylonian Sacaea, and that in celebrating it by the destruction of an effigy of Haman the modern Jews have kept up a reminiscence of the ancient custom of crucifying or hanging a man in the character of a god at the festival. Is it not possible that at an earlier time they may, like the Babylonians themselves, have regularly compelled a condemned criminal to play the tragic part, and that Christ thus perished in the character of Haman? The resemblance between the hanged Haman and the crucified Christ struck the early Christians themselves; and whenever the Jews destroyed an effigy of Haman they were accused by their Christian neighbours of deriding the most sacred mystery of the new faith.<a href="#note_925" id="noteref_925" name="noteref_925"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">925</span></span></a> It is probable that on this painful subject the Christians were too sensitive; remembering the manner of their Founder's death it was natural that they should wince at any pointed allusion to a cross, a gallows, or a public execution, even when the shaft was not aimed at them. An objection to supposing that Christ died as the Haman of the year is that according to the Gospel narrative the crucifixion occurred at the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page415">[pg 415]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg415" name="Pg415"/> Passover, on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, whereas the feast of Purim, at which the hanging of Haman would naturally take place, fell exactly a month earlier, namely, on the fourteenth day of the month Adar. I have no wish to blink or extenuate the serious nature of the difficulty arising from this discrepancy of dates, but I would suggest some considerations which may make us hesitate to decide that the discrepancy is fatal. In the first place, it is possible, though perhaps not probable, that Christian tradition shifted the date of the crucifixion by a month in order to make the great sacrifice of the Lamb of God coincide with that annual sacrifice of the Passover lamb which in the belief of pious hearts had so long foreshadowed it and was thenceforth to cease.<a href="#note_926" id="noteref_926" name="noteref_926"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">926</span></span></a> Instances of gentle pressure brought to bear, for purposes of edification, on stubborn facts are perhaps not wholly unknown in the annals of religion. But the express testimony of history is never to be lightly set aside; and in the investigation of its problems a solution which assumes the veracity and accuracy of the historian is, on an even balance of probabilities, always to be preferred to one which impugns them both. Now in the present case we have seen reason to think that the Babylonian New Year festival, of which Purim was a continuation, did fall in Nisan at or near the time of the Passover, and that when the Jews borrowed the festival they altered the date from Nisan to Adar in order to prevent the new feast from clashing with the old Passover. A reminiscence of the original date of Purim perhaps survives, as I have already pointed out, in the statement in the book of Esther that Haman caused <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="he" xml:lang="he"><span style="font-style: italic">pur</span></span> or lots to be cast before him from the month of Nisan onward.<a href="#note_927" id="noteref_927" name="noteref_927"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">927</span></span></a> It thus seems not impossible that occasionally, for some special reason, the Jews should have celebrated the feast of Purim, or at least the death of Haman, at or about the time of the Passover. But there is another possibility which, remote and fanciful as it may appear, deserves at least to be mentioned. The mock king of the Saturnalia, whose resemblance to the dying Christ was first pointed out by Mr. Wendland, was allowed a period of license of thirty days before he was put to death. If we could suppose that in like manner the Jews spared the human representative of Haman for one month from <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page416">[pg 416]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg416" name="Pg416"/> Purim, the date of his execution would fall exactly on the Passover. Which, if any, of these conjectural solutions of the difficulty is the true one, I will not undertake to say. I am fully conscious of the doubt and uncertainty that hang round the whole subject; and if in this and what follows I throw out some hints and suggestions, it is more in the hope of stimulating and directing further enquiry than with any expectation of reaching definite conclusions.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The part taken by the soldiers in the mockery of Christ.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It may be objected that the mockery of Christ was done, not by the Jews, but by the Roman soldiers, who knew and cared nothing about Haman; how then can we suppose that the purple or scarlet robe, the sceptre of reed, and the crown of thorns, which the soldiers thrust upon Christ, were the regular insignia of the Haman of the year? To this we may reply, in the first place, that even if the legions stationed in Syria were not recruited in the country, they may have contracted some of the native superstitions and have fallen in with the local customs. This is not an idle conjecture. We know that the third legion during its stay in Syria learned the Syrian custom of saluting the rising sun, and that this formal salute, performed by the whole regiment as one man at a critical moment of the great battle of Bedriacum, actually helped to turn the scale when the fortune of empire hung trembling in the balance.<a href="#note_928" id="noteref_928" name="noteref_928"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">928</span></span></a> But it is not necessary to suppose that the garrison of Jerusalem really shared the beliefs and prejudices of the mob whom they overawed; soldiers everywhere are ready to go with a crowd bent on sport, without asking any curious questions as to the history or quality of the entertainment, and we should probably do the humanity of Roman soldiers too much honour if we imagined that they would be deterred by any qualm of conscience from joining in the pastime, which is still so popular, of baiting a Jew to death. But in the second place it should be observed that, according to one of the Evangelists, it was not the soldiers of Pilate who mocked Jesus, but the soldiers of Herod,<a href="#note_929" id="noteref_929" name="noteref_929"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">929</span></span></a> and we may fairly assume that Herod's guards were Jews.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The theory that Christ died, not as a malefactor, but in the character of Haman helps to explain both Pilate's reluctance to put him to death, and it also explains the remarkable superscription on the cross.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The hypothesis that the crucifixion with all its cruel mockery was not a punishment specially devised for Christ, but was merely the fate that annually befell the malefactor who played Haman, appears to go some way towards relieving the Gospel narrative of certain difficulties which otherwise beset it. If, as we read in the Gospels, Pilate was really anxious to save the innocent man whose fine bearing seems to have struck him, what was to hinder him from doing so? He had the power of life and death; why should he not have exercised it on the side of mercy, if his own judgment inclined that way? His reluctant acquiescence in the importunate demand of the rabble becomes easier to understand <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page417">[pg 417]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg417" name="Pg417"/> if we assume that custom obliged him annually at this season to give up to them a prisoner on whom they might play their cruel pranks. On this assumption Pilate had no power to prevent the sacrifice; the most he could do was to choose the victim.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Again, consider the remarkable statement of the Evangelists that Pilate set up over the cross a superscription stating that the man who hung on it was king of the Jews.<a href="#note_930" id="noteref_930" name="noteref_930"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">930</span></span></a> Is it likely that in the reign of Tiberius a Roman governor, with the fear of the jealous and suspicious old emperor before his eyes, would have ventured, even in mockery, to blazon forth a seditious claim of this sort unless it were the regular formula employed on such occasions, recognized by custom, and therefore not liable to be misconstrued into treason by the malignity of informers and the fears of a tyrant?</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But if the tragedy of the ill-fated aspirant after royal honours was annually enacted at Jerusalem by a prisoner who perished on the cross, it becomes probable that the part of his successful rival was also played by another actor who paraded in the same kingly trappings but did not share the same fate. If Jesus was the Haman of the year, where was the Mordecai? Perhaps we may find him in Barabbas.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The part of Mordecai in the annual drama in which Christ died as Haman may have been played by Barabbas. The mock King Carabas in Egypt.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">We are told by the Evangelists that at the feast which witnessed the crucifixion of Christ it was the custom for the Roman governor to release one prisoner, whomsoever the people desired, and that Pilate, convinced of the innocence of Jesus, attempted to persuade the multitude to choose him as the man who should go free. But, hounded on by the priests and elders who had marked out Jesus for destruction, the rabble would not hear of this, and clamoured for the blood of Jesus, while they demanded the release of a certain miscreant, by name Barabbas, who lay in gaol for murder and sedition. Accordingly Pilate had to give way: Christ was crucified and Barabbas set at liberty.<a href="#note_931" id="noteref_931" name="noteref_931"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">931</span></span></a> Now what, we may ask, was the reason for setting free a prisoner at this festival? In the absence of positive information, we may conjecture that the gaol-bird whose cage was thrown open at this time had to purchase his freedom by performing some service from which decent people would shrink. Such a service may very well have been that of going about the streets, rigged out in tawdry splendour with a tinsel crown on his head and a sham sceptre in his hand, preceded and followed by all the tag-rag and bobtail of the town hooting, jeering, and breaking coarse jests at his expense, while some pretended to salaam his mock majesty, and others belaboured the donkey on which he rode. It was in this fashion, probably, that in Persia the beardless and one-eyed man made his undignified progress through the town, to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page418">[pg 418]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg418" name="Pg418"/> the delight of ragamuffins and the terror of shopkeepers, whose goods he unceremoniously confiscated if they did not hasten to lay their peace-offerings at his feet. So, perhaps, the ruffian Barabbas, when his irons were knocked off and the prison door had grated on its hinges to let him forth, tasted the first sweets of liberty in this public manner, even if he was not suffered, like his one-eyed brother, to make raids with impunity on the stalls of the merchants and the tables of the money-changers. A curious confirmation of this conjecture is supplied by a passage in the writings of Philo the Jew, who lived at Alexandria in the time of Christ. He tells us that when Agrippa, the grandson of Herod, had received the crown of Judaea from Caligula at Rome, the new king passed through Alexandria on his way to his own country. The disorderly populace of that great city, animated by a hearty dislike of his nation, seized the opportunity of venting their spite by publicly defaming and ridiculing the Jewish monarch. Among other things they laid hold of a certain harmless lunatic named Carabas, who used to roam the streets stark naked, the butt and laughing-stock of urchins and idlers. This poor wretch they set up in a public place, clapped a paper crown on his head, thrust a broken reed into his hand by way of a sceptre, and having huddled a mat instead of a royal robe about his naked body, and surrounded him with a guard of bludgeon-men, they did obeisance to him as to a king and made a show of taking his opinion on questions of law and policy. To point the jest unmistakably at the Syrian king Agrippa, the bystanders raised cries of <span class="tei tei-q">“Marin! Marin!”</span> which they understood to be the Syrian word for <span class="tei tei-q">“lord.”</span><a href="#note_932" id="noteref_932" name="noteref_932"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">932</span></span></a> This mockery of the Jewish king closely resembles the mockery of Christ; and the joke, such as it was, would receive a keener edge if we could suppose that the riff-raff of Alexandria were familiar with the Jewish practice of setting up a sham king on certain occasions, and that they meant by implication to ridicule the real King Agrippa by comparing him to his holiday counterfeit. May we go a step further and conjecture that one at least of the titles of the mock king of the Jews was regularly Barabbas? The poor imbecile who masqueraded in a paper crown at Alexandria was probably a Jew, otherwise the jest would have lost much of its point; and his name, according to the Greek manuscripts of Philo, was Carabas. But Carabas is meaningless in Hebrew, whereas Barabbas is a regularly formed Hebrew word <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page419">[pg 419]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg419" name="Pg419"/> meaning <span class="tei tei-q">“Son of the Father.”</span> The palaeographic difference between the two forms is slight, and perhaps we shall hardly be deemed very rash if we conjecture that in the passage in question Philo himself wrote Barabbas, which a Greek copyist, ignorant of Hebrew, afterwards corrupted into Carabas. If this were granted, we should still have to assume that both Philo and the authors of the Gospels fell into the mistake of treating as the name of an individual what in fact was a title of office.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Hypothesis that every spring at Purim or Passover the Jews paraded two prisoners in the characters of Haman and Mordecai, of whom one was put to death and the other released.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus the hypothesis which, with great diffidence, I would put forward for consideration is this. It was customary, we may suppose, with the Jews at Purim, or perhaps occasionally at Passover, to employ two prisoners to act the parts respectively of Haman and Mordecai in the passion-play which formed a central feature of the festival. Both men paraded for a short time in the insignia of royalty, but their fates were different; for while at the end of the performance the one who played Haman was hanged or crucified, the one who personated Mordecai and bore in popular parlance the title of Barabbas was allowed to go free. Pilate, perceiving the trumpery nature of the charges brought against Jesus, tried to persuade the Jews to let him play the part of Barabbas, which would have saved his life; but the merciful attempt failed and Jesus perished on the cross in the character of Haman. The description of his last triumphal ride into Jerusalem reads almost like an echo of that brilliant progress through the streets of Susa which Haman aspired to and Mordecai accomplished; and the account of the raid which he immediately afterwards made upon the stalls of the hucksters and money-changers in the temple, may raise a question whether we have not here a trace of those arbitrary rights over property which it has been customary on such occasions to accord to the temporary king.<a href="#note_933" id="noteref_933" name="noteref_933"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">933</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Barabbas (</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Son of the Father</span>
							<span style="font-size: 80%">”</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 80%">) may have been the regular title of the prisoner who was released in the character of Mordecai.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">If it be asked why one of these temporary kings should bear the remarkable title of Barabbas or <span class="tei tei-q">“Son of the Father,”</span> I can only surmise that the title may perhaps be a relic of the time when the real king, the deified man, used to redeem his own life by deputing his son to reign for a short time and to die in his stead. We have seen that the custom of sacrificing the son for the father was common, if not universal, among Semitic peoples; and if we are right in our interpretation of the Passover, that festival—the traditional date of the crucifixion—was the very season when the dreadful sacrifice of the first-born was consummated.<a href="#note_934" id="noteref_934" name="noteref_934"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">934</span></span></a> Hence Barabbas or the <span class="tei tei-q">“Son of the Father”</span> would be a natural enough title for the man or child who reigned and died as a substitute for his royal sire. Even in later times, when the father provided a less <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page420">[pg 420]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg420" name="Pg420"/> precious substitute than his own offspring, it would be quite in accordance with the formal conservatism of religion that the old title should be retained after it had ceased to be appropriate; indeed the efficacy of the sacrifice might be thought to require and justify the pious fiction that the substitute was the very son of that divine father who should have died, but who preferred to live, for the good of his people. If in the time of Christ, as I have conjectured, the title of Barabbas or Son of the Father was bestowed on the Mordecai, the mock king who lived, rather than on the Haman, the mock king who died at the festival, this distinction can hardly have been original; for at first, we may suppose, the same man served in both capacities at different times, as the Mordecai of one year and the Haman of the next. The two characters, as I have attempted to shew, are probably nothing but two different aspects of the same deity considered at one time as dead and at another as risen; hence the human being who personated the risen god would in due time, after he had enjoyed his divine honours for a season, act the dead god by dying in good earnest in his own person; for it would be unreasonable to expect of the ordinary man-god that he should play the two parts in the reverse order by dying first and coming to life afterwards. In both parts the substitute would still be, whether in sober fact or in pious fiction, the Barabbas or Son of that divine Father who generously gave his own son to die for the world.<a href="#note_935" id="noteref_935" name="noteref_935"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">935</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The theory that Christ was put to death, not as a criminal, but as the annual representative of a god, whose counterparts were well known all over Western Asia, may help to explain his early deification and the rapid spread of his worship.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To conclude this speculation, into which I have perhaps been led by the interest and importance of the subject somewhat deeper than the evidence warrants, I venture to urge in its favour that it seems to shed fresh light on some of the causes which contributed to the remarkably rapid diffusion of Christianity in Asia Minor. We know from a famous letter of the younger Pliny addressed to the Emperor Trajan in the year 112 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> that by the beginning of our era, less than a hundred years after the Founder's death, Christianity had made such strides in Bithynia and Pontus that not only cities but villages and rural districts were affected by it, and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page421">[pg 421]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg421" name="Pg421"/> that multitudes of both sexes and of every age and every rank professed its tenets; indeed things had gone so far that the temples were almost deserted, the sacred rites of the public religion discontinued, and hardly a purchaser could be found for the sacrificial victims.<a href="#note_936" id="noteref_936" name="noteref_936"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">936</span></span></a> It is obvious, therefore, that the new faith had elements in it which appealed powerfully to the Asiatic mind. What these elements were, the present investigation has perhaps to some extent disclosed. We have seen that the conception of the dying and risen god was no new one in these regions. All over Western Asia from time immemorial the mournful death and happy resurrection of a divine being appear to have been annually celebrated with alternate rites of bitter lamentation and exultant joy; and through the veil which mythic fancy has woven round this tragic figure we can still detect the features of those great yearly changes in earth and sky which, under all distinctions of race and religion, must always touch the natural human heart with alternate emotions of gladness and regret, because they exhibit on the vastest scale open to our observation the mysterious struggle between life and death. But man has not always been willing to watch passively this momentous conflict; he has felt that he has too great a stake in its issue to stand by with folded hands while it is being fought out; he has taken sides against the forces of death and decay—has flung into the trembling scale all the weight of his puny person, and has exulted in his fancied strength when the great balance has slowly inclined towards the side of life, little knowing that for all his strenuous efforts he can as little stir that balance by a hair's-breadth as can the primrose on a mossy bank in spring or the dead leaf blown by the chilly breath of autumn. Nowhere do these efforts, vain and pitiful, yet pathetic, appear to have been made more persistently and systematically than in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page422">[pg 422]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg422" name="Pg422"/> Western Asia. In name they varied from place to place, but in substance they were all alike. A man, whom the fond imagination of his worshippers invested with the attributes of a god, gave his life for the life of the world; after infusing from his own body a fresh current of vital energy into the stagnant veins of nature, he was cut off from among the living before his failing strength should initiate a universal decay, and his place was taken by another who played, like all his predecessors, the ever-recurring drama of the divine resurrection and death. Such a drama, if our interpretation of it is right, was the original story of Esther and Mordecai or, to give them their older names, of Ishtar and Marduk. It was played in Babylonia, and from Babylonia the returning captives brought it to Judaea, where it was acted, rather as an historical than a mythical piece, by players who, having to die in grim earnest on a cross or gallows, were naturally drawn rather from the gaol than the green-room. A chain of causes which, because we cannot follow them, might in the loose language of daily life be called an accident, determined that the part of the dying god in this annual play should be thrust upon Jesus of Nazareth, whom the enemies he had made in high places by his outspoken strictures were resolved to put out of the way. They succeeded in ridding themselves of the popular and troublesome preacher; but the very step by which they fancied they had simultaneously stamped out his revolutionary doctrines contributed more than anything else they could have done to scatter them broadcast not only over Judaea but over Asia; for it impressed upon what had been hitherto mainly an ethical mission the character of a divine revelation culminating in the passion and death of the incarnate Son of a heavenly Father. In this form the story of the life and death of Jesus exerted an influence which it could never have had if the great teacher had died, as is commonly supposed, the death of a vulgar malefactor. It shed round the cross on Calvary a halo of divinity which multitudes saw and worshipped afar off; the blow struck on Golgotha set a thousand expectant strings vibrating in unison wherever men had heard the old, old story of the dying and risen god. Every year, as another spring bloomed and another autumn faded across the earth, the field had been ploughed and sown and borne fruit of a kind till it received that seed which was destined to spring up and overshadow the world. In the great army of martyrs who in many ages and in many lands, not in Asia only, have died a cruel death in the character of gods, the devout Christian will doubtless discern types and forerunners of the coming Saviour—stars that heralded in the morning sky the advent of the Sun of Righteousness—earthen vessels wherein it pleased the divine wisdom to set before hungering souls the bread of heaven. The sceptic, on the other hand, with equal confidence, will reduce <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page423">[pg 423]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg423" name="Pg423"/> Jesus of Nazareth to the level of a multitude of other victims of a barbarous superstition, and will see in him no more than a moral teacher, whom the fortunate accident of his execution invested with the crown, not merely of a martyr, but of a god. The divergence between these views is wide and deep. Which of them is the truer and will in the end prevail? Time will decide the question of prevalence, if not of truth. Yet we would fain believe that in this and in all things the old maxim will hold good—<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Magna est veritas et praevalebit.</span></span></p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page425">[pg 425]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg425" name="Pg425"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
