<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="division">
			<section id="appendix-3-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h2 epub:type="title">Note A. Chinese Indifference To Death</h2>
				<p>Lord Avebury kindly allows me to print the letter of Mr. M. W. Lampson, referred to above (p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg146">146</a>, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span>). It runs as follows:⁠—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Foreign Office</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">,</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">August 7, 1903</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Dear Lord Avebury</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">—As the result of enquiries I hear from a Mr. Eames, a lawyer who practised for some years at Shanghai and has considerable knowledge of Chinese matters, that for a small sum a substitute can be found for execution. This is recognised by the Chinese authorities, with certain exceptions, as for instance parricide. It is even asserted that the local Taotai gains pecuniarily by this arrangement, as he is as a rule not above obtaining a substitute for the condemned man for a less sum than was paid him by the latter.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">It is, I believe, part of the doctrine of Confucius that it is one of the highest virtues to increase the family prosperity at the expense of personal suffering. According to Eames, the Chinamen [</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">sic</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">] looks upon execution in another man’s stead in this light, and consequently there is quite a competition for such a</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">substitution.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">Should you wish to get more definite information, the address is: W. Eames, Esq., ℅ Norman Craig, Inner Temple, E.C.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">The only man in this department who has actually been out to China is at present away. But on his return I will ask him about it.⁠—</span>
					</p>
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Yours sincerely,</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Miles W. Lampson</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>On this subject Lord Avebury had stated: “It is said that in China, if a rich man is condemned to death, he can sometimes purchase a willing substitute at a very small expense.”<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-726" id="noteref-726" epub:type="noteref">726</a> In regard to his authority for this statement Lord Avebury wrote to me (August 10, 1903): “I believe my previous information came from Sir T. Wade, but I have been unable to lay my hand on his letter, and do not therefore like to state it as a fact.” Sir Thomas Wade was English Ambassador at Peking, and afterwards Professor of Chinese at Cambridge.</p>
				<p>On the same subject Mr. Valentine Chirol, editor of the foreign department of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Times</span></span>, wrote to me as follows:⁠—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Queen Anne’s Mansions, Westminster, S.W.</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">,</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">August 21st, 1905</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Dear Sir</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">—I shall be very glad to do what I can to obtain for you the information you require. It was a surprise to me to hear that the accuracy of the statement was called in question. It is certainly a matter of common report in China that the practice exists. The difficulty, I conceive, will be to obtain evidence enabling one to quote concrete cases. My own impression is that the practice is quite justifiable according to Chinese ethics when life is given up from motives of filial piety, that is to say in order to relieve the wants of indigent parents, or to defray the costs of ancestral rights [</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">sic</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">]. Your general thesis that life is less valued and more readily sacrificed by some races than by modern Europeans seems to be beyond dispute. Surely the Japanese practice of</span>
						<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">sepuku</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, or</span>
						<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">harikari</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, as it is vulgarly called, is a case in point. Life is risked, as in duelling, by Europeans, for the mere point of honour, but it is never deliberately laid down in satisfaction of the exigencies of the social code. I will send you whatever information I can obtain when it reaches me, but that will not of course be for some months.⁠—Yours truly,</span>
					</p>
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Valentine Chirol</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">P.S.</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">—A friend of mine who has just been here entirely confirms my own belief as to the accuracy of your statement, and tells me he has himself seen several Imperial Decrees in the</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Peking Gazette</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">, calling provincial authorities to order for having allowed specific cases of substitution to occur, and ordering the death penalty to be carried out in a more severe form on the original culprits as an extra punishment for obtaining substitutes. He has promised to look up some of these Impe. Decrees on his return to China, and send me translations. I am satisfied personally that his statement is conclusive.</span>
					</p>
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">V. C.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>On the same subject I have received the following letter from Mr. J. O. P. Bland, for fourteen years correspondent of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Times</span></span> in China:⁠—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">The Clock House, Shepperton</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">,</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">March 22nd, 1911</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Dear Professor Frazer</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">—My friend Mr. Valentine Chirol, writing the other day from Crete on his way East, asked me to communicate with you on the subject of your letter of the 3rd ulto., namely, the custom, alleged to exist in China, of procuring substitutes for persons condemned to death, the substitutes’ families or relatives receiving compensation in cash.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">To speak of this as a custom is to exaggerate the frequency of a class of incident which has undoubtedly been recorded in China and</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">of which there has been mention in Imperial Decrees. I am sorry to say that I have not my file of the</span>
						<span class="tei tei-hi">
							<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Peking Gazette</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">here, for immediate reference, but I am writing to my friend Mr. Backhouse in Peking, and have no doubt but that he will be able to give chapter and verse of instances thus recorded. I had expected to find cases of the kind recorded in Mr. Werner’s recently-published</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Descriptive Sociology</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">of the Chinese (Spencerian publications), but have not been able to do so in the absence of an index to that voluminous work. More than one of the authors whom he quotes have certainly referred to cases of substitution for death-sentence prisoners. Parker, for instance (</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">China Past and Present,</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">page 378), asserts that substitutes were to be had in Canton at the reasonable price of fifty taels (say £10). Dr. Matignon (in</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">Superstition, Crime et Misère en Chine,</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 90%">page 113) says that filial piety is a frequent motive. The negative opinion of Professors Giles and de Groot is entitled to consideration, but cannot be regarded as any more conclusive than the views expressed by Professor Giles on the question of infanticide which are outweighed by a mass of direct proof of eye-witnesses.</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">In a country where men submit voluntarily to mutilation and grave risk of death for a comparatively small gain to themselves and their relatives, where women commit suicide in hundreds to escape capture by invaders or strangers, where men and women alike habitually sacrifice their life for the most trivial motives of revenge or distress, it need not greatly surprise us that some should be found, especially among the wretchedly poor class, willing to give up their life in order to relieve their families of want or otherwise to</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">acquire merit.</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
						</span>
					</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
						<span style="font-size: 90%">The most important thing, I think, in expressing any opinion about the Chinese, is to remember the great extent and heterogeneous elements of the country, and to abstain from any sweeping generalisations based on isolated acts or events.⁠—Yours very truly,</span>
					</p>
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">J. O. P. Bland</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>As the practice in question involves a grave miscarriage of justice, the discovery of which might entail serious consequences on the magistrate who connived at it, we need not wonder that it is generally hushed up, and that no instances of it should come to the ears of many Europeans resident in China. My friend Professor H. A. Giles of Cambridge in conversation expressed himself quite incredulous on the subject, and Professor J. J. M. de Groot of Leyden wrote to me (January 31, 1902) to the same effect. The Rev. Dr. W. T. A. Barber, Headmaster of the Leys School, Cambridge, and formerly a missionary in China, wrote to me (January 30, 1902): “As to the possibility that a man condemned to death may secure a substitute on payment of a moderate sum of money, we used to hear that this was the case; but I have no proof that would justify you in using the fact.” Another experienced missionary, the Rev. W. A. Cornaby, wrote to Dr. Barber: “I have heard of no such custom in capital crimes. The man in whose house a fire starts may, and often does, pay another to receive the blows and three days in a cangue. But unless where ‘foreign riots’ were the case, and a previously condemned criminal handy, I should hardly think it possible. Every precaution is taken that no one is beheaded but the man who cannot possibly be let off. The expense on the county mandarin is over £100 in ‘stationery expenses’ with higher courts.” On this I would observe that if every execution costs the local mandarin so dear, he must be under a strong temptation to get the expenses out of the prisoner whenever he can do so without being detected.</p>
				<p>With regard to the custom, mentioned by Mr. Cornaby, of procuring substitutes for corporal punishment, we are told that in China there are men who earn a livelihood by being thrashed instead of the real culprits. But they bribe the executioner to lay on lightly; otherwise their constitution could not long resist the tear and wear of so exhausting a profession.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-727" id="noteref-727" epub:type="noteref">727</a> Thus the theory and practice of vicarious suffering are well understood in China.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
