<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc63" name="toc63"/>
				<a id="pdf64" name="pdf64"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Note. The Pleiades in Primitive Calendars.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Importance of the Pleiades in primitive calendars.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The constellation of the Pleiades plays an important part in the calendar of primitive peoples, both in the northern and in the southern hemisphere; indeed for reasons which at first sight are not obvious savages appear to have paid more attention to this constellation than to any other group of stars in the sky, and in particular they have commonly timed the various operations of the agricultural year by observation of its heliacal rising or setting. Some evidence on the subject was adduced by the late Dr. Richard Andree,<a href="#note_994" id="noteref_994" name="noteref_994"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">994</span></span></a> but much more exists, and it may be worth while to put certain of the facts together.</p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the Australian aborigines.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>In the first place it deserves to be noticed that great attention has been paid to the Pleiades by savages in the southern hemisphere who do not till the ground, and who therefore lack that incentive to observe the stars which is possessed by peoples in the agricultural stage of society; for we can scarcely doubt that in early ages the practical need of ascertaining the proper seasons for sowing and planting has done more than mere speculative curiosity to foster a knowledge of astronomy by compelling savages to scrutinise the great celestial clock for indications of the time of year. Now amongst the rudest of savages known to us are the Australian aborigines, none of whom in their native state ever practised agriculture. Yet we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“they do, according to their manner, worship the hosts of heaven, and believe particular constellations rule natural causes. For such they have names, and sing and dance to gain the favour of the Pleiades (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Mormodellick</span></span>), the constellation worshipped by one body as the giver of rain; but if it should be deferred, instead of blessings curses are apt to be bestowed upon it.”</span><a href="#note_995" id="noteref_995" name="noteref_995"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">995</span></span></a> According to a writer, whose evidence on <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page308">[pg 308]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg308" name="Pg308"/> other matters of Australian beliefs is open to grave doubt, some of the aborigines of New South Wales denied that the sun is the source of heat, because he shines also in winter when the weather is cold; the real cause of warm weather they held to be the Pleiades, because as the summer heat increases, that constellation rises higher and higher in the sky, reaching its greatest elevation in the height of summer, and gradually sinking again in autumn as the days grow cooler, till in winter it is either barely visible or lost to view altogether.<a href="#note_996" id="noteref_996" name="noteref_996"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">996</span></span></a> Another writer, who was well acquainted with the natives of Victoria in the early days of the colony and whose testimony can be relied upon, tells us that an old chief of the Spring Creek tribe <span class="tei tei-q">“taught the young people the names of the favourite planets and constellations, as indications of the seasons. For example, when Canopus is a very little above the horizon in the east at daybreak, the season for emu eggs has come; when the Pleiades are visible in the east an hour before sunrise, the time for visiting friends and neighbouring tribes is at hand.”</span><a href="#note_997" id="noteref_997" name="noteref_997"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">997</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the Indians of Paraguay and Brazil.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>Again, the Abipones of Paraguay, who neither sowed nor reaped,<a href="#note_998" id="noteref_998" name="noteref_998"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">998</span></span></a> nevertheless regarded the Pleiades as an image of their ancestor. As that constellation is invisible in the sky of South America for several months every year, the Abipones believed that their ancestor was then sick, and they were dreadfully afraid that he would die. But when the constellation reappeared in the month of May, they saluted the return of their ancestor with joyous shouts and the glad music of flutes and horns, and they congratulated him on his recovery from sickness. Next day they all went out to collect wild honey, from which they brewed a favourite beverage. Then at sunset they feasted and kept up the revelry all night by the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page309">[pg 309]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg309" name="Pg309"/> light of torches, while a sorceress, who presided at the festivity, shook her rattle and danced. But the proceedings were perfectly decorous; the sexes did not mix with each other.<a href="#note_999" id="noteref_999" name="noteref_999"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">999</span></span></a> The Mocobis of Paraguay also looked upon the Pleiades as their father and creator.<a href="#note_1000" id="noteref_1000" name="noteref_1000"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1000</span></span></a> The Guaycurus of the Gran Chaco used to rejoice greatly at the reappearance of the Pleiades. On this occasion they held a festival at which men and women, boys and girls all beat each other soundly, believing that this brought them health, abundance, and victory over their enemies.<a href="#note_1001" id="noteref_1001" name="noteref_1001"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1001</span></span></a> Amongst the Lengua Indians of Paraguay at the present day the rising of the Pleiades is connected with the beginning of spring, and feasts are held at this time, generally of a markedly immoral character.<a href="#note_1002" id="noteref_1002" name="noteref_1002"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1002</span></span></a> The Guaranis of Paraguay knew the time of sowing by observation of the Pleiades;<a href="#note_1003" id="noteref_1003" name="noteref_1003"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1003</span></span></a> they are said to have revered the constellation and to have dated the beginning of their year from the rising of the constellation in May.<a href="#note_1004" id="noteref_1004" name="noteref_1004"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1004</span></span></a> The Tapuiyas, formerly a numerous and warlike tribe of Brazil, hailed the rising of the Pleiades with great respect, and worshipped the constellation with songs and dances.<a href="#note_1005" id="noteref_1005" name="noteref_1005"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1005</span></span></a> The Indians of north-western Brazil, an agricultural people who subsist mainly by the cultivation of manioc, determine the time for their various field labours by the position of certain constellations, especially the Pleiades; when that constellation has sunk beneath the horizon, the regular, heavy rains set in.<a href="#note_1006" id="noteref_1006" name="noteref_1006"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1006</span></span></a> The Omagua Indians of Brazil ascribe to the Pleiades a special influence on human destiny.<a href="#note_1007" id="noteref_1007" name="noteref_1007"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1007</span></span></a> A Brazilian name for the Pleiades is <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cyiuce</span></span>, that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mother of those who are thirsty.”</span> The constellation, we are told, <span class="tei tei-q">“is known to the Indians of the whole of Brasil and appears to be even worshipped by some tribes in Matto Grosso. In the valley of the Amazon a number of popular sayings are current about it. Thus they say that in the first days of its appearance in the firmament, while it is still low, the birds and especially the fowls sleep on the lower branches or perches, and that just as it rises so do they; that it brings much cold and rain; that when the constellation vanishes, the serpents lose their venom; that the reeds <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page310">[pg 310]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg310" name="Pg310"/> used in making arrows must be cut before the appearance of the Pleiades, else they will be worm-eaten. According to the legend the Pleiades disappear in May and reappear in June. Their reappearance coincides with the renewal of vegetation and of animal life. Hence the legend relates that everything which appears before the constellation is renewed, that is, the appearance of the Pleiades, marks the beginning of spring.”</span><a href="#note_1008" id="noteref_1008" name="noteref_1008"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1008</span></span></a> The Indians of the Orinoco called the Pleiades <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ucasu</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cacasau</span></span>, according to their dialect, and they dated the beginning of their year from the time when these stars are visible in the east after sunset.<a href="#note_1009" id="noteref_1009" name="noteref_1009"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1009</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the Indians of Peru and Mexico.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>By the Indians of Peru <span class="tei tei-q">“the Pleiades were called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Collca</span></span> (the maize-heap): in this constellation the Peruvians both of the sierra and the coast beheld the prototype of their cherished stores of corn. It made their maize to grow, and was worshipped accordingly.”</span><a href="#note_1010" id="noteref_1010" name="noteref_1010"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1010</span></span></a> When the Pleiades appeared above the horizon on or about Corpus Christi Day, these Indians celebrated their chief festival of the year and adored the constellation <span class="tei tei-q">“in order that the maize might not dry up.”</span><a href="#note_1011" id="noteref_1011" name="noteref_1011"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1011</span></span></a> Adjoining the great temple of the Sun at Cuzco there was a cloister with halls opening off it. One of these halls was dedicated to the Moon, and another to the planet Venus, the Pleiades, and all the other stars. The Incas venerated the Pleiades because of their curious position and the symmetry of their shape.<a href="#note_1012" id="noteref_1012" name="noteref_1012"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1012</span></span></a> The tribes of Vera Cruz, on the coast of Mexico, dated the beginning of their year from the heliacal setting of the Pleiades, which in the latitude of Vera Cruz (19° N.) in the year 1519 fell on the first of May of the Gregorian calendar.<a href="#note_1013" id="noteref_1013" name="noteref_1013"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1013</span></span></a> The Aztecs appear to have attached great importance to the Pleiades, for they timed the most solemn and impressive of all their religious ceremonies so as to coincide with the moment when that constellation was in the middle of the sky at midnight. The ceremony consisted in kindling a sacred new fire on the breast of a human victim on the last night of a great period of fifty-two years. They expected that at the close of one of these periods the stars would cease to revolve and the world itself would come to an end. Hence, when the critical moment approached, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page311">[pg 311]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg311" name="Pg311"/> the priests watched from the top of a mountain the movement of the stars, and especially of the Pleiades, with the utmost anxiety. When that constellation was seen to cross the meridian, great was the joy; for they knew that the world was respited for another fifty-two years. Immediately the bravest and handsomest of the captives was thrown down on his back; a board of dry wood was placed on his breast, and one of the priests made fire by twirling a stick between his hands on the board. As soon as the flame burst forth, the breast of the victim was cut open, his heart was torn out, and together with the rest of his body was thrown into the fire. Runners carried the new fire at full speed to all parts of the kingdom to rekindle the cold hearths; for every fire throughout the country had been extinguished as a preparation for this solemn rite.<a href="#note_1014" id="noteref_1014" name="noteref_1014"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1014</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the North American Indians.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The Blackfeet Indians of North America <span class="tei tei-q">“know and observe the Pleiades, and regulate their most important feast by those stars. About the first and the last days of the occultation of the Pleiades there is a sacred feast among the Blackfeet. The mode of observance is national, the whole of the tribe turning out for the celebration of its rites, which include two sacred vigils, the solemn blessing and planting of the seed. It is the opening of the agricultural season.... In all highly religious feasts the calumet, or pipe, is always presented towards the Pleiades, with invocation for life-giving goods. The women swear by the Pleiades as the men do by the sun or the morning star.”</span> At the general meeting of the nation there is a dance of warriors, which is supposed to represent the dance of the seven young men who are identified with the Pleiades. For the Indians say that the seven stars of the constellation were seven brothers, who guarded by night the field of sacred seed and danced round it to keep themselves awake during the long hours of darkness.<a href="#note_1015" id="noteref_1015" name="noteref_1015"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1015</span></span></a> According to another legend told by the Blackfeet, the Pleiades are six children, who were so ashamed because they had no little yellow hides of buffalo calves that they wandered away on the plains and were at last taken up into the sky. <span class="tei tei-q">“They are not seen during the moon, when the buffalo calves are yellow (spring, the time of their shame), but, every year, when the calves turn brown (autumn), the lost children can be seen in the sky every night.”</span><a href="#note_1016" id="noteref_1016" name="noteref_1016"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1016</span></span></a> This version of the myth, it will be observed, recognises <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page312">[pg 312]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg312" name="Pg312"/> only six stars in the constellation, and many savages apparently see no more, which speaks ill for the keenness of their vision; since among ourselves persons endowed with unusually good sight are able, I understand, to discern seven. Among the Pueblo Indians of Tusayan, an ancient province of Arizona, the culmination of the Pleiades is often used to determine the proper time for beginning a sacred nocturnal rite, especially an invocation addressed to the six deities who are believed to rule the six quarters of the world. The writer who records this fact adds: <span class="tei tei-q">“I cannot explain its significance, and why of all stellar objects this minute cluster of stars of a low magnitude is more important than other stellar groups is not clear to me.”</span><a href="#note_1017" id="noteref_1017" name="noteref_1017"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1017</span></span></a> If the Pueblo Indians see only six stars in the cluster, as to which I cannot speak, it might seem to them a reason for assigning one of the stars to each of the six quarters, namely, north, south, east, west, above, and below.</p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the Polynesians.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The Society Islanders in the South Pacific divided the year into two seasons, which they determined by observation of the Pleiades. <span class="tei tei-q">“The first they called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Matarii i nia</span></span>, Pleiades above. It commenced when, in the evening, these stars appeared on or near the horizon; and the half year, during which, immediately after sunset, they were seen above the horizon, was called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Matarii i nia</span></span>. The other season commenced when, at sunset, the stars were invisible, and continued until at that hour they appeared again above the horizon. This season was called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Matarii i raro</span></span>, Pleiades below.”</span><a href="#note_1018" id="noteref_1018" name="noteref_1018"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1018</span></span></a> In the Hervey Islands of the South Pacific it is said that the constellation was originally a single star, which was shattered into six fragments by the god Tane. <span class="tei tei-q">“This cluster of little stars is appropriately named Mata-riki or <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">little-eyes</span></em>, on account of their brightness. It is also designated Tau-ono, or <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">the-six</span></em>, on account of the apparent number of the fragments; the presence of the seventh star not having been detected by the unassisted native eye.”</span><a href="#note_1019" id="noteref_1019" name="noteref_1019"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1019</span></span></a> Among these islanders the arrival of the new year was indicated by the appearance of the constellation on the eastern horizon just after sunset, that is, about the middle of December. <span class="tei tei-q">“Hence the idolatrous worship paid to this beautiful cluster of stars in many of the South Sea Islands. The Pleiades were worshipped at Danger Island, and at the Penrhyns, down to the introduction of Christianity in 1857. In many islands extravagant joy is still manifested at the rising of this constellation out of the ocean.”</span><a href="#note_1020" id="noteref_1020" name="noteref_1020"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1020</span></span></a> For example, in Manahiki or Humphrey's Island, South Pacific, <span class="tei tei-q">“when the constellation Pleiades was seen there was unusual joy all over the month, and expressed by singing, dancing, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page313">[pg 313]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg313" name="Pg313"/> and blowing-shell trumpets.”</span><a href="#note_1021" id="noteref_1021" name="noteref_1021"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1021</span></span></a> So the Maoris of New Zealand, another Polynesian people of the South Pacific, divided the year into moons and determined the first moon by the rising of the Pleiades, which they called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Matariki</span></span>.<a href="#note_1022" id="noteref_1022" name="noteref_1022"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1022</span></span></a> Indeed throughout Polynesia the rising of the Pleiades (variously known as Matariki, Mataliki, Matalii, Makalii, etc.) seems to have marked the beginning of the year.<a href="#note_1023" id="noteref_1023" name="noteref_1023"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1023</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the Melanesians.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>Among some of the Melanesians also the Pleiades occupy an important position in the calendar. <span class="tei tei-q">“The Banks' islanders and Northern New Hebrides people content themselves with distinguishing the Pleiades, by which the approach of yam harvest is marked.”</span><a href="#note_1024" id="noteref_1024" name="noteref_1024"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1024</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Amongst the constellations, the Pleiades and Orion's belt seem to be those which are most familiar to the natives of Bougainville Straits. The former, which they speak of as possessing six stars, they name <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Vuhu</span></span>; the latter <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Matatala</span></span>. They have also names for a few other stars. As in the case of many other savage races, the Pleiades is a constellation of great significance with the inhabitants of these straits. The Treasury Islanders hold a great feast towards the end of October, to celebrate, as far as I could learn, the approaching appearance of the constellation above the eastern horizon soon after sunset. Probably, as in many of the Pacific Islands, this event marks the beginning of their year. I learned from Mr. Stephens that, in Ugi, where of all the constellations the Pleiades alone receives a name, the natives are guided by it in selecting the times for planting and taking up the yams.”</span><a href="#note_1025" id="noteref_1025" name="noteref_1025"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1025</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the natives of New Guinea and the Indian Archipelago.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The natives of the Torres Straits islands observe the appearance of the Pleiades (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Usiam</span></span>) on the horizon at sunset; and when they see it, they say that the new yam time has come.<a href="#note_1026" id="noteref_1026" name="noteref_1026"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1026</span></span></a> The Kai and the Bukaua, two agricultural tribes of German New Guinea, also determine the season of their labour in the fields by observation of the Pleiades: the Kai say that the time for such labours is when the Pleiades are visible above the horizon at night.<a href="#note_1027" id="noteref_1027" name="noteref_1027"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1027</span></span></a> In some districts of northern Celebes the rice-fields are similarly prepared for cultivation when the Pleiades are seen at a certain height above the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page314">[pg 314]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg314" name="Pg314"/> horizon.<a href="#note_1028" id="noteref_1028" name="noteref_1028"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1028</span></span></a> As to the Dyaks of Sarawak we read that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Pleiades themselves tell them when to farm; and according to their position in the heavens, morning and evening, do they cut down the forest, burn, plant, and reap. The Malays are obliged to follow their example, or their lunar year would soon render their farming operations unprofitable.”</span><a href="#note_1029" id="noteref_1029" name="noteref_1029"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1029</span></span></a> When the season for clearing fresh land in the forest approaches, a wise man is appointed to go out before dawn and watch for the Pleiades. As soon as the constellation is seen to rise while it is yet dark, they know that the time has come to begin. But not until the Pleiades are at the zenith before dawn do the Dyaks think it desirable to burn the fallen timber and to sow the rice.<a href="#note_1030" id="noteref_1030" name="noteref_1030"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1030</span></span></a> However, the Kenyahs and Kayans, two other tribes of Sarawak, determine the agricultural seasons by observation of the sun rather than of the stars; and for this purpose they have devised certain simple but ingenious mechanisms. The Kenyahs measure the length of the shadow cast by an upright pole at noon; and the Kayans let in a beam of light through a hole in the roof and measure the distance from the point immediately below the hole to the place where the light reaches the floor.<a href="#note_1031" id="noteref_1031" name="noteref_1031"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1031</span></span></a> But the Kayans of the Mahakam river, in Dutch Borneo, determine the time for sowing by observing when the sun sets in a line with two upright stones.<a href="#note_1032" id="noteref_1032" name="noteref_1032"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1032</span></span></a> In Bali, an island to the east of Java, the appearance of the Pleiades at sunset in March marks the end of the year.<a href="#note_1033" id="noteref_1033" name="noteref_1033"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1033</span></span></a> The Pleiades and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page315">[pg 315]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg315" name="Pg315"/> Orion are the only constellations which the people of Bali observe for the purpose of correcting their lunar calendar by intercalation. For example, they bring the lunar year into harmony with the solar by prolonging the month Asada until the Pleiades are visible at sunset.<a href="#note_1034" id="noteref_1034" name="noteref_1034"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1034</span></span></a> The natives of Nias, an island to the south of Sumatra, pay little heed to the stars, but they have names for the Morning Star and for the Pleiades; and when the Pleiades appear in the sky, the people assemble to till their fields, for they think that to do so before the rising of the constellation would be useless.<a href="#note_1035" id="noteref_1035" name="noteref_1035"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1035</span></span></a> In some districts of Sumatra <span class="tei tei-q">“much confusion in regard to the period of sowing is said to have arisen from a very extraordinary cause. Anciently, say the natives, it was regulated by the stars, and particularly by the appearance (heliacal rising) of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">bintang baniak</span></span> or Pleiades; but after the introduction of the Mahometan religion, they were induced to follow the returns of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">puāsa</span></span> or great annual fast, and forgot their old rules. The consequence of this was obvious; for the lunar year of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">hejrah</span></span> being eleven days short of the sidereal or solar year, the order of the seasons was soon inverted; and it is only astonishing that its inaptness to the purposes of agriculture should not have been immediately discovered.”</span><a href="#note_1036" id="noteref_1036" name="noteref_1036"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1036</span></span></a> The Battas or Bataks of central Sumatra date the various operations of the agricultural year by the positions of Orion and the Pleiades. When the Pleiades rise before the sun at the beginning of July, the Achinese of northern Sumatra know that the time has come to sow the rice.<a href="#note_1037" id="noteref_1037" name="noteref_1037"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1037</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Attention paid to the Pleiades by the natives of Africa, Greeks, and Romans.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>Scattered and fragmentary as these notices are, they suffice to shew that the Pleiades have received much attention from savages in the tropical regions of the world from Brasil in the east to Sumatra in the west. Far to the north of the tropics the rude Kamchatkans are said to know only three constellations, the Great Bear, the Pleiades, and three stars in Orion.<a href="#note_1038" id="noteref_1038" name="noteref_1038"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1038</span></span></a> When we pass to Africa we again find the Pleiades employed by tribes in various parts of the continent to mark the seasons of the agricultural year. We have seen that the Caffres of South Africa date their new year from the rising of the Pleiades just before sunrise and fix the time for sowing by observation of that constellation.<a href="#note_1039" id="noteref_1039" name="noteref_1039"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1039</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“They calculate <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page316">[pg 316]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg316" name="Pg316"/> only twelve lunar months for the year, for which they have descriptive names, and this results in frequent confusion and difference of opinion as to which month it really is. The confusion is always rectified by the first appearance of Pleiades just before sunrise, and a fresh start is made and things go on smoothly till once more the moons get out of place, and reference has again to be made to the stars.”</span><a href="#note_1040" id="noteref_1040" name="noteref_1040"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1040</span></span></a> According to another authority on the Bantu tribes of South Africa, <span class="tei tei-q">“the rising of the Pleiades shortly after sunset was regarded as indicating the planting season. To this constellation, as well as to several of the prominent stars and planets, they gave expressive names. They formed no theories concerning the nature of the heavenly bodies and their motions, and were not given to thinking of such things.”</span><a href="#note_1041" id="noteref_1041" name="noteref_1041"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1041</span></span></a> The Amazulu call the Pleiades <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Isilimela</span></span>, which means <span class="tei tei-q">“The digging-for (stars),”</span> because when the Pleiades appear the people begin to dig. They say that <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Isilimela</span></span> (the Pleiades) dies, and is not seen. It is not seen in winter; and at last, when the winter is coming to an end, it begins to appear—one of its stars first, and then three, until going on increasing it becomes a cluster of stars, and is perfectly clear when the sun is about to rise. And we say <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Isilimela</span></span> is renewed, and the year is renewed, and so we begin to dig.”</span><a href="#note_1042" id="noteref_1042" name="noteref_1042"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1042</span></span></a> The Bechuanas <span class="tei tei-q">“are directed by the position of certain stars in the heavens, that the time has arrived, in the revolving year, when particular roots can be dug up for use, or when they may commence their labours of the field. This is their <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">likhakologo</span></span> (turnings or revolvings), or what we should call the spring time of the year. The Pleiades they call <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">seleméla</span></span>, which may be translated <span class="tei tei-q">‘cultivator,’</span> or the precursor of agriculture, from <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">leméla</span></span>, the relative verb to cultivate <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">for</span></em>; and <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">se</span></span>, a pronominal prefix, distinguishing them as the actors. Thus, when this constellation assumes a certain position in the heavens, it is the signal to commence cultivating their fields and gardens.”</span><a href="#note_1043" id="noteref_1043" name="noteref_1043"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1043</span></span></a> Among some of these South African tribes the period of seclusion observed by lads after circumcision comes to an end with the appearance of the Pleiades, and accordingly the youths are said to long as ardently for the rising of the constellation as Mohammedans for the rising of the moon which will put an end to the fast of Ramadan.<a href="#note_1044" id="noteref_1044" name="noteref_1044"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1044</span></span></a> The Hottentots date the seasons of the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page317">[pg 317]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg317" name="Pg317"/> year by the rising and setting of the Pleiades.<a href="#note_1045" id="noteref_1045" name="noteref_1045"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1045</span></span></a> An early Moravian missionary settled among the Hottentots, reports that <span class="tei tei-q">“at the return of the Pleiades these natives celebrate an anniversary; as soon as these stars appear above the eastern horizon mothers will lift their little ones on their arms, and running up to elevated spots, will show to them those friendly stars, and teach them to stretch their little hands towards them. The people of a kraal will assemble to dance and to sing according to the old custom of their ancestors. The chorus always sings: <span class="tei tei-q">‘O Tiqua, our Father above our heads, give rain to us, that the fruits (bulbs, etc.), <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">uientjes</span></span>, may ripen, and that we may have plenty of food, send us a good year.’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_1046" id="noteref_1046" name="noteref_1046"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1046</span></span></a> With some tribes of British Central Africa the rising of the Pleiades early in the evening is the signal for the hoeing to begin.<a href="#note_1047" id="noteref_1047" name="noteref_1047"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1047</span></span></a> To the Masai of East Africa the appearance of the Pleiades in the wrest is the sign of the beginning of the rainy season, which takes its name from the constellation.<a href="#note_1048" id="noteref_1048" name="noteref_1048"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1048</span></span></a> In Masailand the Pleiades are above the horizon from September till about the seventeenth of May; and the people, as they express it themselves, <span class="tei tei-q">“know whether it will rain or not according to the appearance or non-appearance of the six stars, called The Pleiades, which follow after one another like cattle. When the month which the Masai call <span class="tei tei-q">‘Of the Pleiades’</span><a href="#note_1049" id="noteref_1049" name="noteref_1049"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1049</span></span></a> arrives, and the Pleiades are no longer visible, they know that the rains are over. For the Pleiades set in that month and are not seen again until the season of showers has come to an end:<a href="#note_1050" id="noteref_1050" name="noteref_1050"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1050</span></span></a> it is then that they reappear.”</span><a href="#note_1051" id="noteref_1051" name="noteref_1051"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1051</span></span></a> The only other groups of stars for which the Masai appear to have names are Orion's sword and Orion's belt.<a href="#note_1052" id="noteref_1052" name="noteref_1052"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1052</span></span></a> The Nandi of British East Africa have a special name (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Koremerik</span></span>) for the Pleiades, <span class="tei tei-q">“and it is by the appearance or non-appearance of these stars that the Nandi know whether they may expect a good or a bad harvest.”</span><a href="#note_1053" id="noteref_1053" name="noteref_1053"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1053</span></span></a> The Kikuyu of the same region say that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Pleiades is the mark in the heavens to show the people when to plant their crops; they plant when this constellation is in a certain position early in the night.”</span><a href="#note_1054" id="noteref_1054" name="noteref_1054"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1054</span></span></a> In Sierra Leone <span class="tei tei-q">“the proper time <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page318">[pg 318]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg318" name="Pg318"/> for preparing the plantations is shewn by the particular situation in which the Pleiades, called by the Bulloms <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">a-warrang</span></span>, the only stars which they observe or distinguish by peculiar names, are to be seen at sunset.”</span><a href="#note_1055" id="noteref_1055" name="noteref_1055"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1055</span></span></a> We have seen that ancient Greek farmers reaped their corn when the Pleiades rose at sunrise in May, and that they ploughed their fields when the constellation set at sunrise in November.<a href="#note_1056" id="noteref_1056" name="noteref_1056"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1056</span></span></a> The interval between the two dates is about six months. Both the Greeks and the Romans dated the beginning of summer from the heliacal rising of the Pleiades and the beginning of winter from their heliacal setting.<a href="#note_1057" id="noteref_1057" name="noteref_1057"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1057</span></span></a> Pliny regarded the autumnal setting of the Pleiades as the proper season for sowing the corn, particularly the wheat and the barley, and he tells us that in Greece and Asia all the crops were sown at the setting of that constellation.<a href="#note_1058" id="noteref_1058" name="noteref_1058"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1058</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The widespread association of the Pleiades with agriculture seems to be based on the coincidence of their rising or setting with the commencement of the rainy season.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>So widespread over the world has been and is the association of the Pleiades with agriculture, especially with the sowing or planting of the crops. The reason for the association seems to be the coincidence of the rising or setting of the constellation with the commencement of the rainy season; since men must very soon have learned that the best, if not the only, season to sow and plant is the time of year when the newly-planted seeds or roots will be quickened by abundant showers. The same association of the Pleiades with rain seems sufficient to explain their importance even for savages who do not till the ground; for ignorant though such races are, they yet can hardly fail to observe that wild fruits grow more plentifully, and therefore that they themselves have more to eat after a heavy fall of rain than after a long drought. In point of fact we saw that some of the Australian aborigines, who are wholly ignorant of agriculture, look on the Pleiades as the givers of rain, and curse the constellation if its appearance is not followed by the expected showers.<a href="#note_1059" id="noteref_1059" name="noteref_1059"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1059</span></span></a> On the other side of the world, and at the opposite end of the scale of culture, the civilised Greeks similarly supposed that the autumnal setting of the Pleiades was the cause of the rains which followed it; and the astronomical writer Geminus thought it worth while to argue against the supposition, pointing out that the vicissitudes of the weather and of the seasons, though they may coincide with the risings and settings of the constellations, are not produced by them, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page319">[pg 319]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg319" name="Pg319"/> the stars being too distant from the earth to exercise any appreciable influence on our atmosphere. Hence, he says, though the constellations serve as the signals, they must not be regarded as the causes, of atmospheric changes; and he aptly illustrates the distinction by a reference to beacon-fires, which are the signals, but not the causes, of war.<a href="#note_1060" id="noteref_1060" name="noteref_1060"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1060</span></span></a></p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
