<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Note B. Swinging as a Magical Rite</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="appendix-3-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Note B. Swinging as a Magical Rite</h3>
				<p>The custom of swinging has been practised as a religious or rather magical rite in various parts of the world, but it does not seem possible to explain all the instances of it in the same way. People appear to have resorted to the practice from different motives and with different ideas of the benefit to be derived from it. In the text we have seen that the Letts, and perhaps the Siamese, swing to make the crops grow tall.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-728" id="noteref-3-728" epub:type="noteref">728</a> The same may be the intention of the ceremony whenever it is specially observed at harvest festivals. Among the Buginese and Macassars of Celebes, for example, it used to be the custom for young girls to swing one after the other on these occasions.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-729" id="noteref-3-729" epub:type="noteref">729</a> At the great Dassera festival of Nepaul, which immediately precedes the cutting of the rice, swings and kites come into fashion among the young people of both sexes. The swings are sometimes hung from boughs of trees, but generally from a crossbeam supported on a framework of tall bamboos.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-730" id="noteref-3-730" epub:type="noteref">730</a> Among the Dyaks of Sarawak a feast is held at the end of harvest, when the soul of the rice is secured to prevent the crops from rotting away. On this occasion a number of old women rock to and fro on a rude swing suspended from the rafters.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-731" id="noteref-3-731" epub:type="noteref">731</a> A traveller in Sarawak has described how he saw many tall swings erected and Dyaks swinging to and fro on them, sometimes ten or twelve men together on one swing, while they chanted in monotonous, dirge-like tones an invocation to the spirits that they would be pleased to grant a plentiful harvest of sago and fruit and a good fishing season.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-732" id="noteref-3-732" epub:type="noteref">732</a></p>
				<p>In the East Indian island of Bengkali elaborate and costly ceremonies are performed to ensure a good catch of fish. Among the rest an hereditary priestess, who bears the royal title of Djindjang Rajah, works herself up by means of the fumes of incense and so forth into that state of mental disorder which with many people passes for a symptom of divine inspiration. In this pious frame of mind she is led by her four handmaids to a swing all covered with yellow and hung with golden bells, on which she takes her seat amid the jingle of the bells. As she rocks gently to and fro in the swing, she speaks in an unknown tongue to each of the sixteen spirits who have to do with the fishing.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-733" id="noteref-3-733" epub:type="noteref">733</a> In order to procure a plentiful supply of game the Tinneh Indians of Northwest America perform a magical ceremony which they call “the young man bounding or tied.” They pinion a man tightly, and having hung him by the head and heels from the roof of the hut, rock him backwards and forwards.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-734" id="noteref-3-734" epub:type="noteref">734</a></p>
				<p>Thus we see that people swing in order to procure a plentiful supply of fish and game as well as good crops. In such cases the notion seems to be that the ceremony promotes fertility, whether in the vegetable or the animal kingdom; though why it should be supposed to do so, I confess myself unable to explain. There seem to be some reasons for thinking that the Indian rite of swinging on hooks run through the flesh of the performer is also resorted to, at least in some cases, from a belief in its fertilising virtue. Thus Hamilton tells us that at Karwar, on the west coast of India, a feast is held at the end of May or beginning of June in honour of the infernal gods, “with a divination or conjuration to know the fate of the ensuing crop of corn.” Men were hung from a pole by means of tenterhooks inserted in the flesh of their backs; and the pole with the men dangling from it was then dragged for more than a mile over ploughed ground from one sacred grove to another, preceded by a young girl who carried a pot of fire on her head. When the second grove was reached, the men were let down and taken off the hooks, and the girl fell into the usual prophetic frenzy, after which she unfolded to the priests the revelation with which she had just been favoured by the terrestrial gods. In each of the groves a shapeless black stone, daubed with red lead to stand for a mouth, eyes, and ears, appears to have represented the indwelling divinity.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-735" id="noteref-3-735" epub:type="noteref">735</a> Sometimes this custom of swinging on hooks, which is known among the Hindus as <i>Churuk Puja</i>, seems to be intended to propitiate demons. Some Santals asked <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Ball to be allowed to perform it because their women and children were dying of sickness, and their cattle were being killed by wild beasts; they believed that these misfortunes befell them because the evil spirits had not been appeased.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-736" id="noteref-3-736" epub:type="noteref">736</a> These same Santals celebrate a swinging festival of a less barbarous sort about the month of February. Eight men sit in chairs and rotate round posts in a sort of revolving swing, like the merry-go-rounds which are so dear to children at English fairs.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-737" id="noteref-3-737" epub:type="noteref">737</a> At the Nauroz and Eed festivals in Dardistan the women swing on ropes suspended from trees.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-738" id="noteref-3-738" epub:type="noteref">738</a> During the rainy season in Behar young women swing in their houses, while they sing songs appropriate to the season. The period during which they indulge in this pastime, if a mere pastime it be, is strictly limited; it begins with a festival which usually falls on the twenty-fifth of the month Jeyt and ends with another festival which commonly takes place on the twenty-fifth of the month Asin. No one would think of swinging at any other time of the year.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-739" id="noteref-3-739" epub:type="noteref">739</a> It is possible that this last custom may be nothing more than a pastime meant to while away some of the tedious hours of the inclement season; but its limitation to a certain clearly-defined portion of the year seems rather to point to a religious or magical origin. Possibly the intention may once have been to drive away the rain. We shall see immediately that swinging is sometimes resorted to for the purpose of expelling the powers of evil. About the middle of March the Hindus observe a swinging festival of a different sort in honour of the god Krishna, whose image is placed in the seat or cradle of a swing and then, just when the dawn is breaking, rocked gently to and fro several times. The same ceremony is repeated at noon and at sunset.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-740" id="noteref-3-740" epub:type="noteref">740</a> In the Rigveda the sun is called, by a natural metaphor, “the golden swing in the sky,” and the expression helps us to understand a ceremony of Vedic India. A priest sat in a swing and touched with the span of his right hand at once the seat of the swing and the ground. In doing so he said, “The great lord has united himself with the great lady, the god has united himself with the goddess.” Perhaps he meant to indicate in a graphic way that the sun had reached that lowest point of its course where it was nearest to the earth.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-741" id="noteref-3-741" epub:type="noteref">741</a> In this connection it is of interest to note that in the Estonian celebration of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Day or the summer solstice swings play, along with bonfires, the most prominent part. Girls sit and swing the whole night through, singing old songs to explain why they do so. For legend tells of an Estonian prince who wooed and won an Islandic princess. But a wicked enchanter spirited away the lover to a desert island, where he languished in captivity, till his ladylove contrived to break the magic spell that bound him. Together they sailed home to Esthonia, which they reached on <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Day, and burnt their ship, resolved to stray no longer in far foreign lands. The swings in which the Estonian maidens still rock themselves on <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Day are said to recall the ship in which the lovers tossed upon the stormy sea, and the bonfires commemorate the burning of it. When the fires have died out, the swings are laid aside and never used again either in the village or at the solitary alehouse until spring comes round once more.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-742" id="noteref-3-742" epub:type="noteref">742</a> Here it is natural to connect both swings and bonfires with the apparent course of the sun, who reaches the highest and turning point of his orbit on <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Day. Bonfires and swings perhaps were originally charms intended to kindle and speed afresh on its heavenly road “the golden swing in the sky.” Among the Letts of South Livonia and Curland the summer solstice is the occasion of a great festival of flowers, at which the people sing songs with the constant refrain of <i>lihgo, lihgo</i>. It has been proposed to derive the word <i>lihgo</i> from the Lettish verb <i>ligot</i>, “to swing,” with reference to the sun swinging in the sky at this turning-point of his course.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-743" id="noteref-3-743" epub:type="noteref">743</a></p>
				<p>At Tengaroeng, in Eastern Borneo, the priests and priestesses receive the inspiration of the spirits seated in swings and rocking themselves to and fro. Thus suspended in the air they appear to be in a peculiarly favourable position for catching the divine afflatus. One end of the plank which forms the seat of the priest’s swing is carved in the rude likeness of a crocodile’s head; the swing of the priestess is similarly ornamented with a serpent’s head.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-744" id="noteref-3-744" epub:type="noteref">744</a></p>
				<p>Again, swings are used for the cure of sickness, but it is the doctor who rocks himself in them, not the patient. In North Borneo the Dyak medicine man will sometimes erect a swing in front of the sick man’s house and sway backwards and forwards on it for the purpose of kicking away the disease, frightening away evil spirits, and catching the stray soul of the sufferer.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-745" id="noteref-3-745" epub:type="noteref">745</a> Clearly in his passage through the air the physician is likely to collide with the disease and the evil spirits, both of which are sure to be loitering about in the neighbourhood of the patient, and the rude shock thus given to the malady and the demons may reasonably be expected to push or hustle them away. At Tengaroeng, in Eastern Borneo, a traveller witnessed a ceremony for the expulsion of an evil spirit in which swinging played a part. After four men in blue shirts bespangled with stars, and wearing coronets of red cloth decorated with beads and bells, had sought diligently for the devil, grabbling about on the floor and grunting withal, three hideous hags dressed in faded red petticoats were brought in with great pomp, carried on the shoulders of Malays, and took their seats, amid solemn silence, on the cradle of a swing, the ends of which were carved to represent the head and tail of a crocodile. Not a sound escaped from the crowd of spectators during this awe-inspiring ceremony; they regarded the business as most serious. The venerable dames then rocked to and fro on the swing, fanning themselves languidly with Chinese paper fans. At a later stage of the performance they and three girls discharged burning arrows at a sort of altar of banana leaves, maize, and grass. This completed the discomfiture of the devil.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-746" id="noteref-3-746" epub:type="noteref">746</a></p>
				<p>The Athenians in antiquity celebrated an annual festival of swinging. Boards were hung from trees by ropes, and people sitting on them swung to and fro, while they sang songs of a loose or voluptuous character. The swinging went on both in public and private. Various explanations were given of the custom; the most generally received was as follows. When Bacchus came among men to make known to them the pleasures of wine, he lodged with a certain Icarus or Icarius, to whom he revealed the precious secret and bade him go forth and carry the glad tidings to all the world. So Icarus loaded a wagon with wineskins, and set out on his travels, the dog Maera running beside him. He came to Attica, and there fell in with shepherds tending their sheep, to whom he gave of the wine. They drank greedily, but when some of them fell down dead drunk, their companions thought the stranger had poisoned them with intent to steal the sheep; so they knocked him on the head. The faithful dog ran home and guided his master’s daughter Erigone to the body. At sight of it she was smitten with despair and hanged herself on a tree beside her dead father, but not until she had prayed that, unless the Athenians should avenge her sire’s murder, their daughters might die the same death as she. Her curse was fulfilled, for soon many Athenian damsels hanged themselves for no obvious reason. An oracle informed the Athenians of the true cause of this epidemic of suicide; so they sought out the bodies of the unhappy pair and instituted the swinging festival to appease Erigone; and at the vintage they offered the first of the grapes to her and her father.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-747" id="noteref-3-747" epub:type="noteref">747</a></p>
				<p>Thus the swinging festival at Athens was regarded by the ancients as an expiation for a suicide or suicides by hanging. This opinion is strongly confirmed by a statement of Varro, that it was unlawful to perform funeral rites in honour of persons who had died by hanging, but that in their case such rites were replaced by a custom of swinging images, as if in imitation of the death they had died.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-748" id="noteref-3-748" epub:type="noteref">748</a> Servius says that the Athenians, failing to find the bodies of Icarius and Erigone on earth, made a pretence of seeking them in the air by swinging on ropes hung from trees; and he seems to have regarded the custom of swinging as a purification by means of air.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-749" id="noteref-3-749" epub:type="noteref">749</a> This explanation probably comes very near the truth; indeed if we substitute “souls” for “bodies” in the wording of it we may almost accept it as exact. It might be thought that the souls of persons who had died by hanging were, more than the souls of the other dead, hovering in the air, since their bodies were suspended in air at the moment of death. Hence it would be considered needful to purge the air of these vagrant spirits, and this might be done by swinging persons or things to and fro, in order that by their impact they might disperse and drive away the baleful ghosts. Thus the custom would be exactly analogous, on the one hand, to the practice of the Malay medicine-man, who swings to and fro in front of the patient’s house in order to chase away the disease, or to frighten away evil spirits, or to catch the stray soul of the sick man, and, on the other hand, to the practice of the Central Australian aborigines who beat the air with their weapons and hands in order to drive the lingering ghost away to the grave.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-750" id="noteref-3-750" epub:type="noteref">750</a> At Rome swinging seems to have formed part of the great Latin festival (<i xml:lang="la">Feriae Latinae</i>), and its origin was traced to a search in the air for the body or even the soul of King Latinus, who had disappeared from earth after the battle with Mezentius, King of Caere.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-751" id="noteref-3-751" epub:type="noteref">751</a></p>
				<p>Yet on the other hand there are circumstances which point to an intimate association, both at Athens and Rome, of these swinging festivals with an intention of promoting the growth of cultivated plants. Such circumstances are the legendary connection of the Athenian festival with Bacchus, the custom of offering the first-fruits of the vintage to Erigone and Icarius,<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-752" id="noteref-3-752" epub:type="noteref">752</a> and at Rome the practice of hanging masks on trees at the time of sowing<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-753" id="noteref-3-753" epub:type="noteref">753</a> and in order to make the grapes grow better.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-754" id="noteref-3-754" epub:type="noteref">754</a> Perhaps we can reconcile the two apparently discrepant effects attributed to swinging as a means of expiation on the one side and of fertilisation on the other, by supposing that in both cases the intention is to clear the air of dangerous influences, whether these are ghosts of the unburied dead or spiritual powers inimical to the growth of plants. Independent of both appears to be the notion that the higher you swing the higher will grow the crops.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-755" id="noteref-3-755" epub:type="noteref">755</a> This last is homoeopathic or imitative magic pure and simple, without any admixture of the ideas of purification or expiation.</p>
				<p>In modern Greece and Italy the custom of swinging as a festal rite, whatever its origin may be, is still observed in some places. At the small village of Koukoura in Elis an English traveller observed peasants swinging from a tree in honour of <abbr>St.</abbr> George, whose festival it was.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-756" id="noteref-3-756" epub:type="noteref">756</a> On the Tuesday after Easter the maidens of Seriphos play their favourite game of the swing. They hang a rope from one wall to another of the steep, narrow, filthy street, and putting some clothes on it swing one after the other, singing as they swing. Young men who try to pass are called upon to pay toll in the shape of a penny, a song, and a swing. The words which the youth sings are generally these: “The gold is swung, the silver is swung, and swung too is my love with the golden hair”; to which the girl replies, “Who is it that swings me that I may gild him with my favour, that I may work him a fez all covered with pearls?”<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-757" id="noteref-3-757" epub:type="noteref">757</a> In the Greek island of Karpathos the villagers assemble at a given place on each of the four Sundays before Easter, a swing is erected, and the women swing one after the other, singing death wails such as they chant round the mimic tombs in church on the night of Good Friday.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-758" id="noteref-3-758" epub:type="noteref">758</a> On Christmas Day peasant girls in some villages of Calabria fasten ropes to iron rings in the ceiling and swing on them, while they sing certain songs prescribed by custom for the occasion. The practice is regarded not merely as an amusement but also as an act of devotion.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-759" id="noteref-3-759" epub:type="noteref">759</a> “It is a custom in Cadiz, when Christmas comes, to fasten swings in the courtyards of houses, and even in the houses themselves when there is no room for them outside. In the evenings lads and lasses assemble round the swings and pass the time happily in swinging amid joyous songs and cries. The swings are taken down when Carnival is come.”<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-760" id="noteref-3-760" epub:type="noteref">760</a> The observance of the custom at Christmas, that is, at the winter solstice, suggests that in Calabria and Spain, as in Esthonia, the pastime may originally have been a magical rite designed to assist the sun in climbing the steep ascent to the top of the summer sky. If this were so, we might surmise that the gold and the golden hair mentioned by youths and maidens of Seriphos as they swing refer to “the golden swing in the sky,” in other words to the sun whose golden lamp swings daily across the blue vault of heaven.</p>
				<p>However that may be, it would seem that festivals of swinging are especially held in spring. This is true, for example, of North Africa, where such festivals are common. At some places in that part of the world the date of the swinging is the time of the apricots; at others it is said to be the spring equinox. In some places the festival lasts three days, and fathers who have had children born to them within the year bring them and swing them in the swings.<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-761" id="noteref-3-761" epub:type="noteref">761</a> In Corea “the fifth day of the fifth moon is called <i>Tano-nal</i>. Ancestors are then worshipped, and swings are put up in the yards of most houses for the amusement of the people. The women on this day may go about the streets; during the rest of the year they may go out only after dark. Dressed in their prettiest clothes, they visit the various houses and amuse themselves swinging. The swing is said to convey the idea of keeping cool in the approaching summer. It is one of the most popular feasts of the year.”<a href="endnotes-3.xhtml#note-3-762" id="noteref-3-762" epub:type="noteref">762</a> Perhaps the reason here assigned for swinging may explain other instances of the custom; on the principles of homoeopathic magic the swinging may be regarded as a means of ensuring a succession of cool refreshing breezes during the oppressive heat of the ensuing summer.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
