<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc37" name="toc37"/>
				<a id="pdf38" name="pdf38"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter VIII. The Corn-Spirit as an Animal.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc39" name="toc39"/>
					<a id="pdf40" name="pdf40"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. Animal Embodiments of the Corn-spirit.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>In some of the examples which I have cited to establish the meaning of the term <span class="tei tei-q">“neck”</span> as applied to the last sheaf, the corn-spirit appears in animal form as a gander, a goat, a hare, a cat, and a fox. This introduces us to a new aspect of the corn-spirit, which we must now examine. By doing so we shall not only have fresh examples of killing the god, but may hope also to clear up some points which remain obscure in the myths and worship of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, Dionysus, Demeter, and Virbius.</p>
					<p>Amongst the many animals whose forms the corn-spirit is supposed to take are the wolf, dog, hare, fox, cock, goose, quail, cat, goat, cow (ox, bull), pig, and horse. In one or other of these shapes the corn-spirit is often believed to be present in the corn, and to be caught or killed in the last sheaf. As the corn is being cut the animal flees before the reapers, and if a reaper is taken ill on the field, he is supposed to have stumbled unwittingly on the corn-spirit, who has thus punished the profane intruder. It is said <span class="tei tei-q">“the Rye-wolf has got hold of him,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Harvest-goat has given him a push.”</span> The person who cuts the last corn or binds the last sheaf gets the name of the animal, as the Rye-wolf, the Rye-sow, the Oats-goat, and so forth, and retains the name sometimes for a year. Also the animal is frequently represented by a puppet made out of the last sheaf or of wood, flowers, and so on, which is carried home amid rejoicings on the last harvest-waggon. Even where the last sheaf is not made up in animal shape, it is often called the Rye-wolf, the Hare, Goat, and so forth. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page271">[pg 271]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg271" name="Pg271"/> Generally each kind of crop is supposed to have its special animal, which is caught in the last sheaf, and called the Rye-wolf, the Barley-wolf, the Oats-wolf, the Pea-wolf, or the Potato-wolf, according to the crop; but sometimes the figure of the animal is only made up once for all at getting in the last crop of the whole harvest. Sometimes the creature is believed to be killed by the last stroke of the sickle or scythe. But oftener it is thought to live so long as there is corn still unthreshed, and to be caught in the last sheaf threshed. Hence the man who gives the last stroke with the flail is told that he has got the Corn-sow, the Threshing-dog, or the like. When the threshing is finished, a puppet is made in the form of the animal, and this is carried by the thresher of the last sheaf to a neighbouring farm, where the threshing is still going on. This again shews that the corn-spirit is believed to live wherever the corn is still being threshed. Sometimes the thresher of the last sheaf himself represents the animal; and if the people of the next farm, who are still threshing, catch him, they treat him like the animal he represents, by shutting him up in the pig-sty, calling him with the cries commonly addressed to pigs, and so forth.<a href="#note_833" id="noteref_833" name="noteref_833"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">833</span></span></a> These general statements will now be illustrated by examples.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc41" name="toc41"/>
					<a id="pdf42" name="pdf42"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. The Corn-spirit as a Wolf or a Dog.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>We begin with the corn-spirit conceived as a wolf or a dog. This conception is common in France, Germany, and Slavonic countries. Thus, when the wind sets the corn in wave-like motion the peasants often say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Wolf is going over, or through, the corn,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Rye-wolf is rushing over the field,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wolf is in the corn,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the mad Dog is in the corn,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the big Dog is there.”</span><a href="#note_834" id="noteref_834" name="noteref_834"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">834</span></span></a> When children wish to go into the corn-fields to pluck ears <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page272">[pg 272]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg272" name="Pg272"/> or gather the blue corn-flowers, they are warned not to do so, for <span class="tei tei-q">“the big Dog sits in the corn,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wolf sits in the corn, and will tear you in pieces,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wolf will eat you.”</span> The wolf against whom the children are warned is not a common wolf, for he is often spoken of as the Corn-wolf, Rye-wolf, or the like; thus they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Rye-wolf will come and eat you up, children,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Rye-wolf will carry you off,”</span> and so forth.<a href="#note_835" id="noteref_835" name="noteref_835"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">835</span></span></a> Still he has all the outward appearance of a wolf. For in the neighbourhood of Feilenhof (East Prussia), when a wolf was seen running through a field, the peasants used to watch whether he carried his tail in the air or dragged it on the ground. If he dragged it on the ground, they went after him, and thanked him for bringing them a blessing, and even set tit-bits before him. But if he carried his tail high, they cursed him and tried to kill him. Here the wolf is the corn-spirit whose fertilising power is in his tail.<a href="#note_836" id="noteref_836" name="noteref_836"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">836</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Both dog and wolf appear as embodiments of the corn-spirit in harvest-customs. Thus in some parts of Silesia the person who cuts or binds the last sheaf is called the Wheat-dog or the Peas-pug.<a href="#note_837" id="noteref_837" name="noteref_837"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">837</span></span></a> But it is in the harvest-customs of the north-east of France that the idea of the Corn-dog comes out most clearly. Thus when a harvester, through sickness, weariness, or laziness, cannot or will not keep up with the reaper in front of him, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The White Dog passed near him,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“he has the White Bitch,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“the White Bitch has bitten him.”</span><a href="#note_838" id="noteref_838" name="noteref_838"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">838</span></span></a> In the Vosges the Harvest-May is called the <span class="tei tei-q">“Dog of the harvest,”</span><a href="#note_839" id="noteref_839" name="noteref_839"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">839</span></span></a> and the person who cuts the last handful of hay or wheat is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“kill the Dog.”</span><a href="#note_840" id="noteref_840" name="noteref_840"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">840</span></span></a> About Lons-le-Saulnier, in the Jura, the last sheaf is called the Bitch. In the neighbourhood of Verdun the regular expression for finishing the reaping is, <span class="tei tei-q">“They are going to kill the Dog”</span>; and at Epinal they say, according to the crop, <span class="tei tei-q">“We will kill the Wheat-dog, or the Rye-dog, or the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page273">[pg 273]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg273" name="Pg273"/> Potato-dog.”</span><a href="#note_841" id="noteref_841" name="noteref_841"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">841</span></span></a> In Lorraine it is said of the man who cuts the last corn, <span class="tei tei-q">“He is killing the Dog of the harvest.”</span><a href="#note_842" id="noteref_842" name="noteref_842"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">842</span></span></a> At Dux, in the Tyrol, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“strike down the Dog”</span>;<a href="#note_843" id="noteref_843" name="noteref_843"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">843</span></span></a> and at Ahnebergen, near Stade, he is called, according to the crop, Corn-pug, Rye-pug, Wheat-pug.<a href="#note_844" id="noteref_844" name="noteref_844"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">844</span></span></a></p>
					<p>So with the wolf. In Silesia, when the reapers gather round the last patch of standing corn to reap it they are said to be about <span class="tei tei-q">“to catch the Wolf.”</span><a href="#note_845" id="noteref_845" name="noteref_845"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">845</span></span></a> In various parts of Mecklenburg, where the belief in the Corn-wolf is particularly prevalent, every one fears to cut the last corn, because they say that the Wolf is sitting in it; hence every reaper exerts himself to the utmost in order not to be the last, and every woman similarly fears to bind the last sheaf because <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wolf is in it.”</span> So both among the reapers and the binders there is a competition not to be the last to finish.<a href="#note_846" id="noteref_846" name="noteref_846"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">846</span></span></a> And in Germany generally it appears to be a common saying that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wolf sits in the last sheaf.”</span><a href="#note_847" id="noteref_847" name="noteref_847"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">847</span></span></a> In some places they call out to the reaper, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beware of the Wolf”</span>; or they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“He is chasing the Wolf out of the corn.”</span><a href="#note_848" id="noteref_848" name="noteref_848"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">848</span></span></a> In Mecklenburg the last bunch of standing corn is itself commonly called the Wolf, and the man who reaps it <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Wolf,”</span> the animal being described as the Rye-wolf, the Wheat-wolf, the Barley-wolf, and so on according to the particular crop. The reaper of the last corn is himself called Wolf or the Rye-wolf, if the crop is rye, and in many parts of Mecklenburg he has to support the character by pretending to bite the other harvesters or by howling like a wolf.<a href="#note_849" id="noteref_849" name="noteref_849"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">849</span></span></a> The last sheaf of corn is also called the Wolf or the Rye-wolf or the Oats-wolf according to the crop, and of the woman who binds it they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Wolf is biting her,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“She has the Wolf,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“She must fetch the Wolf”</span> (out of the corn). Moreover, she <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page274">[pg 274]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg274" name="Pg274"/> herself is called Wolf; they cry out to her, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou art the Wolf,”</span> and she has to bear the name for a whole year; sometimes, according to the crop, she is called the Rye-wolf or the Potato-wolf.<a href="#note_850" id="noteref_850" name="noteref_850"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">850</span></span></a> In the island of Rügen not only is the woman who binds the last sheaf called Wolf, but when she comes home she bites the lady of the house and the stewardess, for which she receives a large piece of meat. Yet nobody likes to be the Wolf. The same woman may be Rye-wolf, Wheat-wolf, and Oats-wolf, if she happens to bind the last sheaf of rye, wheat, and oats.<a href="#note_851" id="noteref_851" name="noteref_851"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">851</span></span></a> At Buir, in the district of Cologne, it was formerly the custom to give to the last sheaf the shape of a wolf. It was kept in the barn till all the corn was threshed. Then it was brought to the farmer and he had to sprinkle it with beer or brandy.<a href="#note_852" id="noteref_852" name="noteref_852"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">852</span></span></a> At Brunshaupten in Mecklenburg the young woman who bound the last sheaf of wheat used to take a handful of stalks out of it and make <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wheat-wolf”</span> with them; it was the figure of a wolf about two feet long and half a foot high, the legs of the animal being represented by stiff stalks and its tail and mane by wheat-ears. This Wheat-wolf she carried back at the head of the harvesters to the village, where it was set up on a high place in the parlour of the farm and remained there for a long time.<a href="#note_853" id="noteref_853" name="noteref_853"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">853</span></span></a> In many places the sheaf called the Wolf is made up in human form and dressed in clothes. This indicates a confusion of ideas between the corn-spirit conceived in human and in animal form. Generally the Wolf is brought home on the last waggon with joyful cries. Hence the last waggon-load itself receives the name of the Wolf.<a href="#note_854" id="noteref_854" name="noteref_854"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">854</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Again, the Wolf is supposed to hide himself amongst the cut corn in the granary, until he is driven out of the last bundle by the strokes of the flail. Hence at Wanzleben, near Magdeburg, after the threshing the peasants go in procession, leading by a chain a man who is enveloped in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page275">[pg 275]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg275" name="Pg275"/> threshed-out straw and is called the Wolf.<a href="#note_855" id="noteref_855" name="noteref_855"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">855</span></span></a> He represents the corn-spirit who has been caught escaping from the threshed corn. In the district of Treves it is believed that the Corn-wolf is killed at threshing. The men thresh the last sheaf till it is reduced to chopped straw. In this way they think that the Corn-wolf, who was lurking in the last sheaf, has been certainly killed.<a href="#note_856" id="noteref_856" name="noteref_856"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">856</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In France also the Corn-wolf appears at harvest. Thus they call out to the reaper of the last corn, <span class="tei tei-q">“You will catch the Wolf.”</span> Near Chambéry they form a ring round the last standing corn, and cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Wolf is in there.”</span> In Finisterre, when the reaping draws near an end, the harvesters cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“There is the Wolf; we will catch him.”</span> Each takes a swath to reap, and he who finishes first calls out, <span class="tei tei-q">“I've caught the Wolf.”</span><a href="#note_857" id="noteref_857" name="noteref_857"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">857</span></span></a> In Guyenne, when the last corn has been reaped, they lead a wether all round the field. It is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wolf of the field.”</span> Its horns are decked with a wreath of flowers and corn-ears, and its neck and body are also encircled with garlands and ribbons. All the reapers march, singing, behind it. Then it is killed on the field. In this part of France the last sheaf is called the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">coujoulage</span></span>, which, in the patois, means a wether. Hence the killing of the wether represents the death of the corn-spirit, considered as present in the last sheaf; but two different conceptions of the corn-spirit—as a wolf and as a wether—are mixed up together.<a href="#note_858" id="noteref_858" name="noteref_858"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">858</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Sometimes it appears to be thought that the Wolf, caught in the last corn, lives during the winter in the farmhouse, ready to renew his activity as corn-spirit in the spring. Hence at midwinter, when the lengthening days begin to herald the approach of spring, the Wolf makes his appearance once more. In Poland a man, with a wolf's skin thrown over his head, is led about at Christmas; or a stuffed wolf is carried about by persons who collect money.<a href="#note_859" id="noteref_859" name="noteref_859"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">859</span></span></a> There are facts which point to an old custom of leading about a man enveloped in leaves and called the Wolf, while his conductors collected money.<a href="#note_860" id="noteref_860" name="noteref_860"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">860</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page276">[pg 276]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg276" name="Pg276"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc43" name="toc43"/>
					<a id="pdf44" name="pdf44"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 3. The Corn-spirit as a Cock.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Another form which the corn-spirit often assumes is that of a cock. In Austria children are warned against straying in the corn-fields, because the Corn-cock sits there, and will peck their eyes out.<a href="#note_861" id="noteref_861" name="noteref_861"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">861</span></span></a> In North Germany they say that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Cock sits in the last sheaf”</span>; and at cutting the last corn the reapers cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“Now we will chase out the Cock.”</span> When it is cut they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have caught the Cock.”</span><a href="#note_862" id="noteref_862" name="noteref_862"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">862</span></span></a> At Braller, in Transylvania, when the reapers come to the last patch of corn, they cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“Here we shall catch the Cock.”</span><a href="#note_863" id="noteref_863" name="noteref_863"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">863</span></span></a> At Fürstenwalde, when the last sheaf is about to be bound, the master releases a cock, which he has brought in a basket, and lets it run over the field. All the harvesters chase it till they catch it. Elsewhere the harvesters all try to seize the last corn cut; he who succeeds in grasping it must crow, and is called Cock.<a href="#note_864" id="noteref_864" name="noteref_864"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">864</span></span></a> Among the Wends it is or used to be customary for the farmer to hide a live cock under the last sheaf as it lay on the field; and when the corn was being gathered up, the harvester who lighted upon this sheaf had a right to keep the cock, provided he could catch it. This formed the close of the harvest-festival and was known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the Cock-catching,”</span> and the beer which was served out to the reapers at this time went by the name of <span class="tei tei-q">“Cock-beer.”</span><a href="#note_865" id="noteref_865" name="noteref_865"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">865</span></span></a> The last sheaf is called Cock, Cock-sheaf, Harvest-cock, Harvest-hen, Autumn-hen. A distinction is made between a Wheat-cock, Bean-cock, and so on, according to the crop.<a href="#note_866" id="noteref_866" name="noteref_866"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">866</span></span></a> At Wünschensuhl, in Thüringen, the last sheaf is made into the shape of a cock, and called the Harvest-cock.<a href="#note_867" id="noteref_867" name="noteref_867"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">867</span></span></a> A figure of a cock, made of wood, pasteboard, ears of corn, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page277">[pg 277]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg277" name="Pg277"/> or flowers, is borne in front of the harvest-waggon, especially in Westphalia, where the cock carries in his beak fruits of the earth of all kinds. Sometimes the image of the cock is fastened to the top of a May-tree on the last harvest-waggon. Elsewhere a live cock, or a figure of one, is attached to a harvest-crown and carried on a pole. In Galicia and elsewhere this live cock is fastened to the garland of corn-ears or flowers, which the leader of the women-reapers carries on her head as she marches in front of the harvest procession.<a href="#note_868" id="noteref_868" name="noteref_868"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">868</span></span></a> In Silesia a live cock is presented to the master on a plate. The harvest-supper is called Harvest-cock, Stubble-cock, etc., and a chief dish at it, at least in some places, is a cock.<a href="#note_869" id="noteref_869" name="noteref_869"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">869</span></span></a> If a waggoner upsets a harvest-waggon, it is said that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has spilt the Harvest cock,”</span> and he loses the cock, that is, the harvest-supper.<a href="#note_870" id="noteref_870" name="noteref_870"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">870</span></span></a> The harvest-waggon, with the figure of the cock on it, is driven round the farmhouse before it is taken to the barn. Then the cock is nailed over or at the side of the house-door, or on the gable, and remains there till next harvest.<a href="#note_871" id="noteref_871" name="noteref_871"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">871</span></span></a> In East Friesland the person who gives the last stroke at threshing is called the Clucking-hen, and grain is strewed before him as if he were a hen.<a href="#note_872" id="noteref_872" name="noteref_872"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">872</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Again, the corn-spirit is killed in the form of a cock. In parts of Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Picardy the reapers place a live cock in the corn which is to be cut last, and chase it over the field, or bury it up to the neck in the ground; afterwards they strike off its head with a sickle or scythe.<a href="#note_873" id="noteref_873" name="noteref_873"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">873</span></span></a> In many parts of Westphalia, when the harvesters bring the wooden cock to the farmer, he gives them a live <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page278">[pg 278]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg278" name="Pg278"/> cock, which they kill with whips or sticks, or behead with an old sword, or throw into the barn to the girls, or give to the mistress to cook. If the harvest-cock has not been spilt—that is, if no waggon has been upset—the harvesters have the right to kill the farmyard cock by throwing stones at it or beheading it. Where this custom has fallen into disuse, it is still common for the farmer's wife to make cockie-leekie for the harvesters, and to shew them the head of the cock which has been killed for the soup.<a href="#note_874" id="noteref_874" name="noteref_874"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">874</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Klausenburg, Transylvania, a cock is buried on the harvest-field in the earth, so that only its head appears. A young man then takes a scythe and cuts off the cock's head at a single sweep. If he fails to do this, he is called the Red Cock for a whole year, and people fear that next year's crop will be bad.<a href="#note_875" id="noteref_875" name="noteref_875"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">875</span></span></a> Near Udvarhely, in Transylvania, a live cock is bound up in the last sheaf and killed with a spit. It is then skinned. The flesh is thrown away, but the skin and feathers are kept till next year; and in spring the grain from the last sheaf is mixed with the feathers of the cock and scattered on the field which is to be tilled.<a href="#note_876" id="noteref_876" name="noteref_876"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">876</span></span></a> Nothing could set in a clearer light the identification of the cock with the spirit of the corn. By being tied up in the last sheaf and killed, the cock is identified with the corn, and its death with the cutting of the corn. By keeping its feathers till spring, then mixing them with the seed-corn taken from the very sheaf in which the bird had been bound, and scattering the feathers together with the seed over the field, the identity of the bird with the corn is again emphasised, and its quickening and fertilising power, as an embodiment of the corn-spirit, is intimated in the plainest manner. Thus the corn-spirit, in the form of a cock, is killed at harvest, but rises to fresh life and activity in spring. Again, the equivalence of the cock to the corn is expressed, hardly less plainly, in the custom of burying the bird in the ground, and cutting off its head (like the ears of corn) with the scythe.</p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page279">[pg 279]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg279" name="Pg279"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc45" name="toc45"/>
					<a id="pdf46" name="pdf46"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 4. The Corn-spirit as a Hare.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Another common embodiment of the corn-spirit is the hare.<a href="#note_877" id="noteref_877" name="noteref_877"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">877</span></span></a> In Galloway the reaping of the last standing corn is called <span class="tei tei-q">“cutting the Hare.”</span> The mode of cutting it is as follows. When the rest of the corn has been reaped, a handful is left standing to form the Hare. It is divided into three parts and plaited, and the ears are tied in a knot. The reapers then retire a few yards and each throws his or her sickle in turn at the Hare to cut it down. It must be cut below the knot, and the reapers continue to throw their sickles at it, one after the other, until one of them succeeds in severing the stalks below the knot. The Hare is then carried home and given to a maidservant in the kitchen, who places it over the kitchen-door on the inside. Sometimes the Hare used to be thus kept till the next harvest. In the parish of Minnigaff, when the Hare was cut, the unmarried reapers ran home with all speed, and the one who arrived first was the first to be married.<a href="#note_878" id="noteref_878" name="noteref_878"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">878</span></span></a> In Southern Ayrshire the last corn cut is also called the Hare, and the mode of cutting it seems to be the same as in Galloway; at least in the neighbourhood of Kilmarnock the last corn left standing in the middle of the field is plaited, and the reapers used to try to cut it by throwing their sickles at it. When cut, it was carried home and hung up over the door.<a href="#note_879" id="noteref_879" name="noteref_879"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">879</span></span></a> In the Vosges Mountains the person who cuts the last handful of hay or wheat is sometimes said to have caught the Hare; he is congratulated by his comrades and has the honour of carrying the nosegay or the small fir-tree decorated with ribbons which marks the conclusion of the harvest.<a href="#note_880" id="noteref_880" name="noteref_880"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">880</span></span></a> In Germany also one of the names for the last sheaf is the Hare.<a href="#note_881" id="noteref_881" name="noteref_881"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">881</span></span></a> Thus in some parts of Anhalt, when the corn has been reaped and only a few stalks are left standing, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Hare will soon come,”</span> or the reapers cry to each other, <span class="tei tei-q">“Look how the Hare comes <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page280">[pg 280]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg280" name="Pg280"/> jumping out.”</span><a href="#note_882" id="noteref_882" name="noteref_882"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">882</span></span></a> In East Prussia they say that the Hare sits in the last patch of standing corn, and must be chased out by the last reaper. The reapers hurry with their work, each being anxious not to have <span class="tei tei-q">“to chase out the Hare”</span>; for the man who does so, that is, who cuts the last corn, is much laughed at.<a href="#note_883" id="noteref_883" name="noteref_883"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">883</span></span></a> At Birk, in Transylvania, when the reapers come to the last patch, they cry out, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have the Hare.”</span><a href="#note_884" id="noteref_884" name="noteref_884"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">884</span></span></a> At Aurich, as we have seen,<a href="#note_885" id="noteref_885" name="noteref_885"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">885</span></span></a> an expression for cutting the last corn is <span class="tei tei-q">“to cut off the Hare's tail.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“He is killing the Hare”</span> is commonly said of the man who cuts the last corn in Germany, Sweden, Holland, France, and Italy.<a href="#note_886" id="noteref_886" name="noteref_886"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">886</span></span></a> In Norway the man who is thus said to <span class="tei tei-q">“kill the Hare”</span> must give <span class="tei tei-q">“hare's blood”</span> in the form of brandy, to his fellows to drink.<a href="#note_887" id="noteref_887" name="noteref_887"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">887</span></span></a> In Lesbos, when the reapers are at work in two neighbouring fields, each party tries to finish first in order to drive the Hare into their neighbour's field; the reapers who succeed in doing so believe that next year the crop will be better. A small sheaf of corn is made up and kept beside the holy picture till next harvest.<a href="#note_888" id="noteref_888" name="noteref_888"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">888</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc47" name="toc47"/>
					<a id="pdf48" name="pdf48"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 5. The Corn-spirit as a Cat.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Again, the corn-spirit sometimes takes the form of a cat. Near Kiel children are warned not to go into the corn-fields because <span class="tei tei-q">“the Cat sits there.”</span> In the Eisenach Oberland they are told <span class="tei tei-q">“the Corn-cat will come and fetch you,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Corn-cat goes in the corn.”</span> In some parts of Silesia at mowing the last corn they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Cat is caught”</span>; and at threshing, the man who gives the last stroke is called the Cat. In the neighbourhood of Lyons the last sheaf and the harvest-supper are both called the Cat. About Vesoul when they cut the last corn they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have the Cat by the tail.”</span> At Briançon, in Dauphiné, at the beginning of reaping a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page281">[pg 281]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg281" name="Pg281"/> cat is decked out with ribbons, flowers, and ears of corn. It is called the Cat of the ball-skin (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">le chat de peau de balle</span></span>). If a reaper is wounded at his work, they make the cat lick the wound. At the close of the reaping the cat is again decked out with ribbons and ears of corn; then they dance and make merry. When the dance is over the girls solemnly strip the cat of its finery. At Grüneberg, in Silesia, the reaper who cuts the last corn goes by the name of the Tom-cat. He is enveloped in rye-stalks and green withes, and is furnished with a long plaited tail. Sometimes as a companion he has a man similarly dressed, who is called the (female) Cat. Their duty is to run after people whom they see and to beat them with a long stick. Near Amiens the expression for finishing the harvest is, <span class="tei tei-q">“They are going to kill the Cat”</span>; and when the last corn is cut they kill a cat in the farmyard. At threshing, in some parts of France, a live cat is placed under the last bundle of corn to be threshed, and is struck dead with the flails. Then on Sunday it is roasted and eaten as a holiday dish.<a href="#note_889" id="noteref_889" name="noteref_889"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">889</span></span></a> In the Vosges Mountains the close of haymaking or harvest is called <span class="tei tei-q">“catching the cat,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“killing the dog,”</span> or more rarely <span class="tei tei-q">“catching the hare.”</span> The cat, the dog, or the hare is said to be fat or lean according as the crop is good or bad. The man who cuts the last handful of hay or of wheat is said to catch the cat or the hare or to kill the dog. He is congratulated by his comrades and has the honour of carrying the nosegay or rather the small fir-tree decked with ribbons which marks the end of the haymaking or of the harvest.<a href="#note_890" id="noteref_890" name="noteref_890"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">890</span></span></a> In Franche-Comté also the close of harvest is called <span class="tei tei-q">“catching or killing the cat.”</span><a href="#note_891" id="noteref_891" name="noteref_891"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">891</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc49" name="toc49"/>
					<a id="pdf50" name="pdf50"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 6. The Corn-spirit as a Goat.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Further, the corn-spirit often appears in the form of a goat. In some parts of Prussia, when the corn bends before <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page282">[pg 282]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg282" name="Pg282"/> the wind, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Goats are chasing each other,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the wind is driving the Goats through the corn,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Goats are browsing there,”</span> and they expect a very good harvest. Again they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Oats-goat is sitting in the oats-field,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the Corn-goat is sitting in the rye-field.”</span><a href="#note_892" id="noteref_892" name="noteref_892"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">892</span></span></a> Children are warned not to go into the corn-fields to pluck the blue corn-flowers, or amongst the beans to pluck pods, because the Rye-goat, the Corn-goat, the Oats-goat, or the Bean-goat is sitting or lying there, and will carry them away or kill them.<a href="#note_893" id="noteref_893" name="noteref_893"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">893</span></span></a> When a harvester is taken sick or lags behind his fellows at their work, they call out, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Harvest-goat has pushed him,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“he has been pushed by the Corn-goat.”</span><a href="#note_894" id="noteref_894" name="noteref_894"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">894</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Braunsberg (East Prussia) at binding the oats every harvester makes haste <span class="tei tei-q">“lest the Corn-goat push him.”</span> At Oefoten, in Norway, each reaper has his allotted patch to reap. When a reaper in the middle has not finished reaping his piece after his neighbours have finished theirs, they say of him, <span class="tei tei-q">“He remains on the island.”</span> And if the laggard is a man, they imitate the cry with which they call a he-goat; if a woman, the cry with which they call a she-goat.<a href="#note_895" id="noteref_895" name="noteref_895"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">895</span></span></a> Near Straubing, in Lower Bavaria, it is said of the man who cuts the last corn that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has the Corn-goat, or the Wheat-goat, or the Oats-goat,”</span> according to the crop. Moreover, two horns are set up on the last heap of corn, and it is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the horned Goat.”</span> At Kreutzburg, East Prussia, they call out to the woman who is binding the last sheaf, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Goat is sitting in the sheaf.”</span><a href="#note_896" id="noteref_896" name="noteref_896"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">896</span></span></a> At Gablingen, in Swabia, when the last field of oats upon a farm is being reaped, the reapers carve a goat out of wood. Ears of oats are inserted in its nostrils and mouth, and it is adorned with garlands of flowers. It is set up on the field and called the Oats-goat. When the reaping approaches an end, each reaper hastens to finish his piece first; he who is the last to finish gets the Oats-goat.<a href="#note_897" id="noteref_897" name="noteref_897"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">897</span></span></a> Again, the last sheaf is itself called the Goat. Thus, in the valley of the Wiesent, Bavaria, the last sheaf bound on the field is called the Goat, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page283">[pg 283]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg283" name="Pg283"/> and they have a proverb, <span class="tei tei-q">“The field must bear a goat.”</span><a href="#note_898" id="noteref_898" name="noteref_898"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">898</span></span></a> At Spachbrücken, in Hesse, the last handful of corn which is cut is called the Goat, and the man who cuts it is much ridiculed.<a href="#note_899" id="noteref_899" name="noteref_899"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">899</span></span></a> At Dürrenbüchig and about Mosbach in Baden the last sheaf is also called the Goat.<a href="#note_900" id="noteref_900" name="noteref_900"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">900</span></span></a> Sometimes the last sheaf is made up in the form of a goat, and they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Goat is sitting in it.”</span><a href="#note_901" id="noteref_901" name="noteref_901"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">901</span></span></a> Again, the person who cuts or binds the last sheaf is called the Goat. Thus, in parts of Mecklenburg they call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <span class="tei tei-q">“You are the Harvest-goat.”</span> Near Uelzen, in Hanover, the harvest festival begins with <span class="tei tei-q">“the bringing of the Harvest-goat”</span>; that is, the woman who bound the last sheaf is wrapt in straw, crowned with a harvest-wreath, and brought in a wheelbarrow to the village, where a round dance takes place. About Luneburg, also, the woman who binds the last corn is decked with a crown of corn-ears and is called the Corn-goat.<a href="#note_902" id="noteref_902" name="noteref_902"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">902</span></span></a> At Münzesheim in Baden the reaper who cuts the last handful of corn or oats is called the Corn-goat or the Oats-goat.<a href="#note_903" id="noteref_903" name="noteref_903"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">903</span></span></a> In the Canton St. Gall, Switzerland, the person who cuts the last handful of corn on the field, or drives the last harvest-waggon to the barn, is called the Corn-goat or the Rye-goat, or simply the Goat.<a href="#note_904" id="noteref_904" name="noteref_904"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">904</span></span></a> In the Canton Thurgau he is called Corn-goat; like a goat he has a bell hung round his neck, is led in triumph, and drenched with liquor. In parts of Styria, also, the man who cuts the last corn is called Corn-goat, Oats-goat, or the like. As a rule, the man who thus gets the name of Corn-goat has to bear it a whole year till the next harvest.<a href="#note_905" id="noteref_905" name="noteref_905"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">905</span></span></a></p>
					<p>According to one view, the corn-spirit, who has been caught in the form of a goat or otherwise, lives in the farmhouse or barn over winter. Thus, each farm has its own embodiment of the corn-spirit. But, according to another view, the corn-spirit is the genius or deity, not of the corn <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page284">[pg 284]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg284" name="Pg284"/> of one farm only, but of all the corn. Hence when the corn on one farm is all cut, he flees to another where there is still corn left standing. This idea is brought out in a harvest-custom which was formerly observed in Skye. The farmer who first finished reaping sent a man or woman with a sheaf to a neighbouring farmer who had not finished; the latter in his turn, when he had finished, sent on the sheaf to his neighbour who was still reaping; and so the sheaf made the round of the farms till all the corn was cut. The sheaf was called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">goabbir bhacagh</span></span>, that is, the Cripple Goat.<a href="#note_906" id="noteref_906" name="noteref_906"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">906</span></span></a> The custom appears not to be extinct at the present day, for it was reported from Skye only a few years ago. We are told that when the crofters and small farmers are cutting down their corn, each tries his best to finish before his neighbour. The first to finish goes to his neighbour's field and makes up at one end of it a bundle of sheaves in a fanciful shape which goes by the name of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">gobhar bhacach</span></span> or Lame Goat. As each man in succession finishes reaping his field, he proceeds to set up a lame goat of this sort in his neighbour's field where there is still corn standing. No one likes to have the Lame Goat put in his field, <span class="tei tei-q">“not from any ill-luck it brings, but because it is humiliating to have it standing there visible to all neighbours and passers-by, and of course he cannot retaliate.”</span><a href="#note_907" id="noteref_907" name="noteref_907"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">907</span></span></a> The corn-spirit was probably thus represented as lame because he had been crippled by the cutting of the corn. We have seen that sometimes the old woman who brings home the last sheaf must limp on one foot.<a href="#note_908" id="noteref_908" name="noteref_908"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">908</span></span></a> In the Böhmer Wald mountains, between Bohemia and Bavaria, when two peasants are driving home their corn together, they race against each other to see who shall get home first. The village boys mark the loser in the race, and at night they come and erect on the roof of his house the Oats-goat, which is a colossal figure of a goat made of straw.<a href="#note_909" id="noteref_909" name="noteref_909"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">909</span></span></a></p>
					<p>But sometimes the corn-spirit, in the form of a goat, is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page285">[pg 285]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg285" name="Pg285"/> believed to be slain on the harvest-field by the sickle or scythe. Thus, in the neighbourhood of Bernkastel, on the Moselle, the reapers determine by lot the order in which they shall follow each other. The first is called the fore-reaper, the last the tail-bearer. If a reaper overtakes the man in front he reaps past him, bending round so as to leave the slower reaper in a patch by himself. This patch is called the Goat; and the man for whom <span class="tei tei-q">“the Goat is cut”</span> in this way, is laughed and jeered at by his fellows for the rest of the day. When the tail-bearer cuts the last ears of corn, it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">“He is cutting the Goat's neck off.”</span><a href="#note_910" id="noteref_910" name="noteref_910"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">910</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Grenoble, before the end of the reaping, a live goat is adorned with flowers and ribbons and allowed to run about the field. The reapers chase it and try to catch it. When it is caught, the farmer's wife holds it fast while the farmer cuts off its head. The goat's flesh serves to furnish the harvest-supper. A piece of the flesh is pickled and kept till the next harvest, when another goat is killed. Then all the harvesters eat of the flesh. On the same day the skin of the goat is made into a cloak, which the farmer, who works with his men, must always wear at harvest-time if rain or bad weather sets in. But if a reaper gets pains in his back, the farmer gives him the goat-skin to wear.<a href="#note_911" id="noteref_911" name="noteref_911"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">911</span></span></a> The reason for this seems to be that the pains in the back, being inflicted by the corn-spirit, can also be healed by it. Similarly, we saw that elsewhere, when a reaper is wounded at reaping, a cat, as the representative of the corn-spirit, is made to lick the wound.<a href="#note_912" id="noteref_912" name="noteref_912"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">912</span></span></a> Esthonian reapers in the island of Mon think that the man who cuts the first ears of corn at harvest will get pains in his back,<a href="#note_913" id="noteref_913" name="noteref_913"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">913</span></span></a> probably because the corn-spirit is believed to resent especially the first wound; and, in order to escape pains in the back, Saxon reapers in Transylvania gird their loins with the first handful of ears which they cut.<a href="#note_914" id="noteref_914" name="noteref_914"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">914</span></span></a> Here, again, the corn-spirit is applied to for healing or protection, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page286">[pg 286]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg286" name="Pg286"/> but in his original vegetable form, not in the form of a goat or a cat.</p>
					<p>Further, the corn-spirit under the form of a goat is sometimes conceived as lurking among the cut corn in the barn, till he is driven from it by the threshing-flail. Thus in Baden the last sheaf to be threshed is called the Corn-goat, the Spelt-goat, or the Oats-goat according to the kind of grain.<a href="#note_915" id="noteref_915" name="noteref_915"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">915</span></span></a> Again, near Marktl, in Upper Bavaria, the sheaves are called Straw-goats or simply Goats. They are laid in a great heap on the open field and threshed by two rows of men standing opposite each other, who, as they ply their flails, sing a song in which they say that they see the Straw-goat amongst the corn-stalks. The last Goat, that is, the last sheaf, is adorned with a wreath of violets and other flowers and with cakes strung together. It is placed right in the middle of the heap. Some of the threshers rush at it and tear the best of it out; others lay on with their flails so recklessly that heads are sometimes broken. In threshing this last sheaf, each man casts up to the man opposite him the misdeeds of which he has been guilty throughout the year.<a href="#note_916" id="noteref_916" name="noteref_916"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">916</span></span></a> At Oberinntal, in the Tyrol, the last thresher is called Goat.<a href="#note_917" id="noteref_917" name="noteref_917"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">917</span></span></a> So at Haselberg, in West Bohemia, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing oats is called the Oats-goat.<a href="#note_918" id="noteref_918" name="noteref_918"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">918</span></span></a> At Tettnang, in Würtemburg, the thresher who gives the last stroke to the last bundle of corn before it is turned goes by the name of the He-goat, and it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">“He has driven the He-goat away.”</span> The person who, after the bundle has been turned, gives the last stroke of all, is called the She-goat.<a href="#note_919" id="noteref_919" name="noteref_919"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">919</span></span></a> In this custom it is implied that the corn is inhabited by a pair of corn-spirits, male and female.</p>
					<p>Further, the corn-spirit, captured in the form of a goat at threshing, is passed on to a neighbour whose threshing is not yet finished. In Franche Comté, as soon as the threshing is over, the young people set up a straw figure of a goat on the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page287">[pg 287]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg287" name="Pg287"/> farmyard of a neighbour who is still threshing. He must give them wine or money in return. At Ellwangen, in Würtemburg, the effigy of a goat is made out of the last bundle of corn at threshing; four sticks form its legs, and two its horns. The man who gives the last stroke with the flail must carry the Goat to the barn of a neighbour who is still threshing and throw it down on the floor; if he is caught in the act, they tie the goat on his back.<a href="#note_920" id="noteref_920" name="noteref_920"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">920</span></span></a> A similar custom is observed at Indersdorf, in Upper Bavaria; the man who throws the straw Goat into the neighbour's barn imitates the bleating of a goat; if they catch him, they blacken his face and tie the Goat on his back.<a href="#note_921" id="noteref_921" name="noteref_921"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">921</span></span></a> At Zabern, in Elsace, when a farmer is a week or more behind his neighbours with his threshing, they set a real stuffed goat or fox before his door.<a href="#note_922" id="noteref_922" name="noteref_922"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">922</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Sometimes the spirit of the corn in goat form is believed to be killed at threshing. In the district of Traunstein, Upper Bavaria, they think that the Oats-goat is in the last sheaf of oats. He is represented by an old rake set up on end, with an old pot for a head. The children are then told to kill the Oats-goat.<a href="#note_923" id="noteref_923" name="noteref_923"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">923</span></span></a> Elsewhere, however, the corn-spirit in the form of a goat is apparently thought to live in the field throughout the winter. Hence at Wannefeld near Gardelegen, and also between Calbe and Salzwedel, in the Altmark, the last stalks used to be left uncut on the harvest-field with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“That shall the He-goat keep!”</span> Evidently the last corn was here left as a provision for the corn-spirit, lest, robbed of all his substance, he should die of hunger. A stranger passing a harvest-field is sometimes taken for the Corn-goat escaping in human shape from the cut or threshed grain. Thus, when a stranger passes a harvest-field, all the labourers stop and shout as with one voice, <span class="tei tei-q">“He-goat! He-goat!”</span> At rape-seed threshing in Schleswig, which is generally done on the field, the same cry is raised if the stranger does not take off his hat.<a href="#note_924" id="noteref_924" name="noteref_924"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">924</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page288">[pg 288]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg288" name="Pg288"/>
					<p>At sowing their winter corn the old Prussians used to kill a goat, consume its flesh with many superstitious ceremonies, and hang the skin on a high pole near an oak and a large stone. There it remained till harvest, when a great bunch of corn and herbs was fastened to the pole above the goat-skin. Then, after a prayer had been offered by a peasant who acted as priest (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Weidulut</span></span>), the young folks joined hands and danced round the oak and the pole. Afterwards they scrambled for the bunch of corn, and the priest distributed the herbs with a sparing hand. Then he placed the goat-skin on the large stone, sat down on it, and preached to the people about the history of their forefathers and their old heathen customs and beliefs.<a href="#note_925" id="noteref_925" name="noteref_925"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">925</span></span></a> The goat-skin thus suspended on the field from sowing time to harvest perhaps represents the corn-spirit superintending the growth of the corn. The Tomori of Central Celebes imagine that the spirits which cause rice to grow have the form of great goats with long hair and long lips.<a href="#note_926" id="noteref_926" name="noteref_926"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">926</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc51" name="toc51"/>
					<a id="pdf52" name="pdf52"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 7. The Corn-spirit as a Bull, Cow, or Ox.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Another form which the corn-spirit often assumes is that of a bull, cow, or ox. When the wind sweeps over the corn they say at Conitz, in West Prussia, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Steer is running in the corn”</span>;<a href="#note_927" id="noteref_927" name="noteref_927"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">927</span></span></a> when the corn is thick and strong in one spot, they say in some parts of East Prussia, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bull is lying in the corn.”</span> When a harvester has overstrained and lamed himself, they say in the Graudenz district of West Prussia, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bull pushed him”</span>; in Lothringen they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“He has the Bull.”</span> The meaning of both expressions is that he has unwittingly lighted upon the divine corn-spirit, who has punished the profane intruder with lameness.<a href="#note_928" id="noteref_928" name="noteref_928"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">928</span></span></a> So near Chambéry when a reaper wounds himself with his sickle, it is said that he has <span class="tei tei-q">“the wound of the Ox.”</span><a href="#note_929" id="noteref_929" name="noteref_929"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">929</span></span></a> In <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page289">[pg 289]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg289" name="Pg289"/> the district of Bunzlau (Silesia) the last sheaf is sometimes made into the shape of a horned ox, stuffed with tow and wrapt in corn-ears. This figure is called the Old Man. In some parts of Bohemia the last sheaf is made up in human form and called the Buffalo-bull.<a href="#note_930" id="noteref_930" name="noteref_930"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">930</span></span></a> These cases shew a confusion of the human with the animal shape of the corn-spirit. The confusion is like that of killing a wether under the name of a wolf.<a href="#note_931" id="noteref_931" name="noteref_931"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">931</span></span></a> In the Canton of Thurgau, Switzerland, the last sheaf, if it is a large one, is called the Cow.<a href="#note_932" id="noteref_932" name="noteref_932"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">932</span></span></a> All over Swabia the last bundle of corn on the field is called the Cow; the man who cuts the last ears <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Cow,”</span> and is himself called Cow or Barley-cow or Oats-cow, according to the crop; at the harvest-supper he gets a nosegay of flowers and corn-ears and a more liberal allowance of drink than the rest. But he is teased and laughed at; so no one likes to be the Cow.<a href="#note_933" id="noteref_933" name="noteref_933"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">933</span></span></a> The Cow was sometimes represented by the figure of a woman made out of ears of corn and corn-flowers. It was carried to the farmhouse by the man who had cut the last handful of corn. The children ran after him and the neighbours turned out to laugh at him, till the farmer took the Cow from him.<a href="#note_934" id="noteref_934" name="noteref_934"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">934</span></span></a> Here again the confusion between the human and the animal form of the corn-spirit is apparent. In various parts of Switzerland the reaper who cuts the last ears of corn is called Wheat-cow, Corn-cow, Oats-cow, or Corn-steer, and is the butt of many a joke.<a href="#note_935" id="noteref_935" name="noteref_935"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">935</span></span></a> In some parts of East Prussia, when a few ears of corn have been left standing by inadvertence on the last swath, the foremost reaper seizes them and cries, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bull! Bull!”</span><a href="#note_936" id="noteref_936" name="noteref_936"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">936</span></span></a> On the other hand, in the district of Rosenheim, Upper Bavaria, when a farmer is later of getting in his harvest than his neighbours, they set up on his land a Straw-bull, as it is called. This is a gigantic figure of a bull made of stubble on a framework of wood and adorned with flowers and leaves. Attached to it is a label on which are scrawled <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page290">[pg 290]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg290" name="Pg290"/> doggerel verses in ridicule of the man on whose land the Straw-bull is set up.<a href="#note_937" id="noteref_937" name="noteref_937"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">937</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a bull or ox is killed on the harvest-field at the close of the reaping. At Pouilly, near Dijon, when the last ears of corn are about to be cut, an ox adorned with ribbons, flowers, and ears of corn is led all round the field, followed by the whole troop of reapers dancing. Then a man disguised as the Devil cuts the last ears of corn and immediately slaughters the ox. Part of the flesh of the animal is eaten at the harvest-supper; part is pickled and kept till the first day of sowing in spring. At Pont à Mousson and elsewhere on the evening of the last day of reaping, a calf adorned with flowers and ears of corn is led thrice round the farmyard, being allured by a bait or driven by men with sticks, or conducted by the farmer's wife with a rope. The calf chosen for this ceremony is the calf which was born first on the farm in the spring of the year. It is followed by all the reapers with their tools. Then it is allowed to run free; the reapers chase it, and whoever catches it is called King of the Calf. Lastly, it is solemnly killed; at Lunéville the man who acts as butcher is the Jewish merchant of the village.<a href="#note_938" id="noteref_938" name="noteref_938"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">938</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Sometimes again the corn-spirit hides himself amongst the cut corn in the barn to reappear in bull or cow form at threshing. Thus at Wurmlingen, in Thüringen, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is called the Cow, or rather the Barley-cow, Oats-cow, Peas-cow, or the like, according to the crop. He is entirely enveloped in straw; his head is surmounted by sticks in imitation of horns, and two lads lead him by ropes to the well to drink. On the way thither he must low like a cow, and for a long time afterwards he goes by the name of the Cow.<a href="#note_939" id="noteref_939" name="noteref_939"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">939</span></span></a> At Obermedlingen, in Swabia, when the threshing draws near an end, each man is careful to avoid giving the last stroke. He who does give it <span class="tei tei-q">“gets the Cow,”</span> which is a straw figure dressed in an old ragged petticoat, hood, and stockings. It is tied on his back <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page291">[pg 291]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg291" name="Pg291"/> with a straw-rope; his face is blackened, and being bound with straw-ropes to a wheelbarrow he is wheeled round the village.<a href="#note_940" id="noteref_940" name="noteref_940"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">940</span></span></a> Here, again, we meet with that confusion between the human and animal shape of the corn-spirit which we have noted in other customs. In Canton Schaffhausen the man who threshes the last corn is called the Cow; in Canton Thurgau, the Corn-bull; in Canton Zurich, the Thresher-cow. In the last-mentioned district he is wrapt in straw and bound to one of the trees in the orchard.<a href="#note_941" id="noteref_941" name="noteref_941"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">941</span></span></a> At Arad, in Hungary, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is enveloped in straw and a cow's hide with the horns attached to it.<a href="#note_942" id="noteref_942" name="noteref_942"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">942</span></span></a> At Pessnitz, in the district of Dresden, the man who gives the last stroke with the flail is called Bull. He must make a straw-man and set it up before a neighbour's window.<a href="#note_943" id="noteref_943" name="noteref_943"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">943</span></span></a> Here, apparently, as in so many cases, the corn-spirit is passed on to a neighbour who has not finished threshing. So at Herbrechtingen, in Thüringen, the effigy of a ragged old woman is flung into the barn of the farmer who is last with his threshing. The man who throws it in cries, <span class="tei tei-q">“There is the Cow for you.”</span> If the threshers catch him they detain him over night and punish him by keeping him from the harvest-supper.<a href="#note_944" id="noteref_944" name="noteref_944"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">944</span></span></a> In these latter customs the confusion between the human and the animal shape of the corn-spirit meets us again.</p>
					<p>Further, the corn-spirit in bull form is sometimes believed to be killed at threshing. At Auxerre, in threshing the last bundle of corn, they call out twelve times, <span class="tei tei-q">“We are killing the Bull.”</span> In the neighbourhood of Bordeaux, where a butcher kills an ox on the field immediately after the close of the reaping, it is said of the man who gives the last stroke at threshing that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has killed the Bull.”</span><a href="#note_945" id="noteref_945" name="noteref_945"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">945</span></span></a> At Chambéry the last sheaf is called the sheaf of the Young Ox, and a race takes place to it in which all the reapers join. When the last stroke is given at threshing they say that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Ox is killed”</span>; and immediately thereupon <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page292">[pg 292]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg292" name="Pg292"/> a real ox is slaughtered by the reaper who cut the last corn. The flesh of the ox is eaten by the threshers at supper.<a href="#note_946" id="noteref_946" name="noteref_946"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">946</span></span></a></p>
					<p>We have seen that sometimes the young corn-spirit, whose task it is to quicken the corn of the coming year, is believed to be born as a Corn-baby on the harvest-field.<a href="#note_947" id="noteref_947" name="noteref_947"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">947</span></span></a> Similarly in Berry the young corn-spirit is sometimes supposed to be born on the field in calf form; for when a binder has not rope enough to bind all the corn in sheaves, he puts aside the wheat that remains over and imitates the lowing of a cow. The meaning is that <span class="tei tei-q">“the sheaf has given birth to a calf.”</span><a href="#note_948" id="noteref_948" name="noteref_948"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">948</span></span></a> In Puy-de-Dôme when a binder cannot keep up with the reaper whom he or she follows, they say <span class="tei tei-q">“He (or she) is giving birth to the Calf.”</span><a href="#note_949" id="noteref_949" name="noteref_949"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">949</span></span></a> In some parts of Prussia, in similar circumstances, they call out to the woman, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bull is coming,”</span> and imitate the bellowing of a bull.<a href="#note_950" id="noteref_950" name="noteref_950"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">950</span></span></a> In these cases the woman is conceived as the Corn-cow or old corn-spirit, while the supposed calf is the Corn-calf or young corn-spirit. In some parts of Austria a mythical calf (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Muhkälbchen</span></span>) is believed to be seen amongst the sprouting corn in spring and to push the children; when the corn waves in the wind they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Calf is going about.”</span> Clearly, as Mannhardt observes, this calf of the spring-time is the same animal which is afterwards believed to be killed at reaping.<a href="#note_951" id="noteref_951" name="noteref_951"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">951</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc53" name="toc53"/>
					<a id="pdf54" name="pdf54"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 8. The Corn-spirit as a Horse or Mare.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Sometimes the corn-spirit appears in the shape of a horse or mare. Between Kalw and Stuttgart, when the corn bends before the wind, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“There runs the Horse.”</span><a href="#note_952" id="noteref_952" name="noteref_952"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">952</span></span></a> At Bohlingen, near Radolfzell in Baden, the last sheaf of oats is called the Oats-stallion.<a href="#note_953" id="noteref_953" name="noteref_953"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">953</span></span></a> In Hertfordshire, at the end of the reaping, there is or used to be observed a ceremony called <span class="tei tei-q">“crying the Mare.”</span> The last blades of corn left standing on the field are tied together and called the Mare. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page293">[pg 293]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg293" name="Pg293"/> The reapers stand at a distance and throw their sickles at it; he who cuts it through <span class="tei tei-q">“has the prize, with acclamations and good cheer.”</span> After it is cut the reapers cry thrice with a loud voice, <span class="tei tei-q">“I have her!”</span> Others answer thrice, <span class="tei tei-q">“What have you?”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“A Mare! a Mare! a Mare!”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“Whose is she?”</span> is next asked thrice. <span class="tei tei-q">“A. B.'s,”</span> naming the owner thrice. <span class="tei tei-q">“Whither will you send her?”</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">“To C. D.,”</span> naming some neighbour who has not reaped all his corn.<a href="#note_954" id="noteref_954" name="noteref_954"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">954</span></span></a> In this custom the corn-spirit in the form of a mare is passed on from a farm where the corn is all cut to another farm where it is still standing, and where therefore the corn-spirit may be supposed naturally to take refuge. In Shropshire the custom is similar. <span class="tei tei-q">“Crying, calling, or shouting the mare is a ceremony performed by the men of that farm which is the first in any parish or district to finish the harvest. The object of it is to make known their own prowess, and to taunt the laggards by a pretended offer of the <span class="tei tei-q">‘owd mar'’</span> [old mare] to help out their <span class="tei tei-q">‘chem’</span> [team]. All the men assemble (the wooden harvest-bottle being of course one of the company) in the stackyard, or, better, on the highest ground on the farm, and there shout the following dialogue, preceding it by a grand <span class="tei tei-q">‘Hip, hip, hip, hurrah!’</span></span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘I 'ave 'er, I 'ave 'er, I 'ave 'er!’</span></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘Whad 'ast thee, whad 'ast thee, whad 'ast thee?’</span></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘A mar'! a mar'! a mar'!’</span></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘Whose is 'er, whose is 'er, whose is 'er?’</span></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘Maister A.'s, Maister A.'s, Maister A.'s!’</span> (naming the farmer whose harvest is finished).</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘W'eer sha't the' send 'er? w'eer sha't the' send 'er? w'eer sha't the' send 'er?’</span></span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘To Maister B.'s, to Maister B.'s, to Maister B.'s’</span> (naming one whose harvest is <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">not</span></em> finished).</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘'Uth a hip, hip, hip, hurrah!’</span> (in chorus).”</span>
					</p>
					<p>The farmer who finishes his harvest last, and who therefore cannot send the Mare to any one else, is said <span class="tei tei-q">“to keep her all winter.”</span> The mocking offer of the Mare was sometimes responded to by a mocking acceptance of her help. Thus an old man told an enquirer, <span class="tei tei-q">“While we wun at supper, a mon cumm'd wi' a autar [halter] to fatch <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page294">[pg 294]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg294" name="Pg294"/> her away.”</span> But at one place (Longnor, near Leebotwood), down to about 1850, the Mare used really to be sent. <span class="tei tei-q">“The head man of the farmer who had finished harvest first was mounted on the best horse of the team—the leader—both horse and man being adorned with ribbons, streamers, etc. Thus arrayed, a boy on foot led the pair in triumph to the neighbouring farmhouses. Sometimes the man who took the <span class="tei tei-q">‘mare’</span> received, as well as plenty of harvest-ale, some rather rough, though good-humoured, treatment, coming back minus his decorations, and so on.”</span><a href="#note_955" id="noteref_955" name="noteref_955"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">955</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In the neighbourhood of Lille the idea of the corn-spirit in horse form is clearly preserved. When a harvester grows weary at his work, it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">“He has the fatigue of the Horse.”</span> The first sheaf, called the <span class="tei tei-q">“Cross of the Horse,”</span> is placed on a cross of boxwood in the barn, and the youngest horse on the farm must tread on it. The reapers dance round the last blades of corn, crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“See the remains of the Horse.”</span> The sheaf made out of these last blades is given to the youngest horse of the parish (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">commune</span></span>) to eat. This youngest horse of the parish clearly represents, as Mannhardt says, the corn-spirit of the following year, the Corn-foal, which absorbs the spirit of the old Corn-horse by eating the last corn cut; for, as usual, the old corn-spirit takes his final refuge in the last sheaf. The thresher of the last sheaf is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“beat the Horse.”</span><a href="#note_956" id="noteref_956" name="noteref_956"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">956</span></span></a> Again, a trace of the horse-shaped corn-spirit is reported from Berry. The harvesters there are accustomed to take a noonday nap in the field. This is called <span class="tei tei-q">“seeing the Horse.”</span> The leader or <span class="tei tei-q">“King”</span> of the harvesters gives the signal for going to sleep. If he delays giving the signal, one of the harvesters will begin to neigh like a horse, the rest imitate him, and then they all go <span class="tei tei-q">“to see the Horse.”</span><a href="#note_957" id="noteref_957" name="noteref_957"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">957</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page295">[pg 295]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg295" name="Pg295"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc55" name="toc55"/>
					<a id="pdf56" name="pdf56"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 9. The Corn-spirit as a Bird.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Sometimes the corn-spirit assumes the form of a bird. Thus among the Saxons of the Bistritz district in Transylvania there is a saying that the quail is sitting in the last standing stalks on the harvest-field, and all the reapers rush at these stalks in order, as they say, to catch the quail.<a href="#note_958" id="noteref_958" name="noteref_958"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">958</span></span></a> Exactly the same expression is used by reapers in Austrian Silesia when they are about to cut the last standing corn, whatever the kind of grain may be.<a href="#note_959" id="noteref_959" name="noteref_959"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">959</span></span></a> In the Bocage of Normandy, when the reapers have come to the last ears of the last rig, they surround them for the purpose of catching the quail, which is supposed to have taken refuge there. They run about the corn crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mind the Quail!”</span> and make believe to grab at the bird amid shouts and laughter.<a href="#note_960" id="noteref_960" name="noteref_960"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">960</span></span></a> Connected with this identification of the corn-spirit with a quail is probably the belief that the cry of the bird in spring is prophetic of the price of corn in the autumn; in Germany they say that corn will sell at as many gulden a bushel as the quail uttered its cry over the fields in spring. Similar prognostications are drawn from the note of the bird in central and western France, in Switzerland and in Tuscany.<a href="#note_961" id="noteref_961" name="noteref_961"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">961</span></span></a> Perhaps one reason for identifying the quail with the corn-spirit is that the bird lays its eggs on the ground, without making much of a nest.<a href="#note_962" id="noteref_962" name="noteref_962"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">962</span></span></a> Similarly the Toradjas of Central Celebes think that the soul of the rice is embodied in a pretty little blue bird which builds its nest in the rice-field at the time when the rice is beginning to germinate, and which disappears again after the harvest. Thus both the place and the time of the appearance of the bird suggest to the natives the notion that the blue bird is the rice incarnate. And like the note of the quail in Europe the note of this <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page296">[pg 296]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg296" name="Pg296"/> little bird in Celebes is believed to prognosticate the state of the harvest, foretelling whether the rice will be abundant or scarce. Nobody may drive the bird away; to do so would not merely injure the rice, it would hurt the eyes of the sacrilegious person and might even strike him blind. In Minahassa, a district in the north of Celebes, a similar though less definite belief attaches to a sort of small quail which loves to haunt the rice-fields before the rice is reaped; and when the Galelareeze of Halmahera hear a certain kind of bird, which they call <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">togè</span></span>, croaking among the rice in ear, they say that the bird is putting the grain into the rice, so they will not kill it.<a href="#note_963" id="noteref_963" name="noteref_963"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">963</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc57" name="toc57"/>
					<a id="pdf58" name="pdf58"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 10. The Corn-spirit as a Fox.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Another animal whose shape the corn-spirit is sometimes thought to assume is the fox. The conception is recorded at various places in Germany and France. Thus at Nördlingen in Bavaria, when the corn waves to and fro in the wind, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The fox goes through the corn,”</span> and at Usingen in Nassau they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The foxes are marching through the corn.”</span> At Ravensberg, in Westphalia, and at Steinau, in Kurhessen, children are warned against straying in the corn, <span class="tei tei-q">“because the Fox is there.”</span> At Campe, near Stade, when they are about to cut the last corn, they call out to the reaper, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Fox is sitting there, hold him fast!”</span> In the Department of the Moselle they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Watch whether the Fox comes out.”</span> In Bourbonnais the expression is, <span class="tei tei-q">“You will catch the Fox.”</span> When a reaper wounds himself or is sick at reaping, they say in the Lower Loire that <span class="tei tei-q">“He has the Fox.”</span> In Côte-d'or they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“He has killed the Fox.”</span> At Louhans, in Sâone-et-Loire, when the reapers are cutting the last corn they leave a handful standing and throw their sickles at it. He who hits it is called the Fox, and two girls deck his bonnet with flowers. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page297">[pg 297]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg297" name="Pg297"/> In the evening there is a dance, at which the Fox dances with all the girls. The supper which follows is also called the Fox; they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have eaten the Fox,”</span> meaning that they have partaken of the harvest-supper. In the Canton of Zurich the last sheaf is called the Fox. At Bourgogne, in Ain, they cry out, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Fox is sitting in the last sheaf,”</span> and having made the figure of an animal out of white cloth and some ears of the last corn, they dub it the Fox and throw it into the house of a neighbour who has not yet got in all his harvest.<a href="#note_964" id="noteref_964" name="noteref_964"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">964</span></span></a> In Poitou, when the corn is being reaped in a district, all the reapers strive to finish as quickly as possible in order that they may send <span class="tei tei-q">“the Fox”</span> to the fields of a farmer who has not yet garnered his sheaves. The man who cuts the last handful of standing corn is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“have the Fox.”</span> This last handful is carried to the farmer's house and occupies a place on the table during the harvest-supper; and the custom is to drench it with water. After that it is set up on the chimney-piece and remains there the whole year.<a href="#note_965" id="noteref_965" name="noteref_965"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">965</span></span></a> At threshing, also, in Sâone-et-Loire, the last sheaf is called the Fox; in Lot they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“We are going to beat the Fox”</span>; and at Zabern in Alsace they set a stuffed fox before the door of the threshing-floor of a neighbour who has not finished his threshing.<a href="#note_966" id="noteref_966" name="noteref_966"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">966</span></span></a> With this conception of the fox as an embodiment of the corn-spirit may possibly be connected an old custom, observed in Holstein and Westphalia, of carrying a dead or living fox from house to house in spring; the intention of the custom was perhaps to diffuse the refreshing and invigorating influence of the reawakened spirit of vegetation.<a href="#note_967" id="noteref_967" name="noteref_967"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">967</span></span></a> In Japan the rice-god Inari is represented as an elderly man with a long beard riding on a white fox, and the fox is always associated with this deity. In front of his shrines may usually be seen a pair of foxes carved in wood or stone.<a href="#note_968" id="noteref_968" name="noteref_968"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">968</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page298">[pg 298]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg298" name="Pg298"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc59" name="toc59"/>
					<a id="pdf60" name="pdf60"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 11. The Corn-spirit as a Pig (Boar or Sow).</span>
					</h2>
					<p>The last animal embodiment of the corn-spirit which we shall notice is the pig (boar or sow). In Thüringen, when the wind sets the young corn in motion, they sometimes say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Boar is rushing through the corn.”</span><a href="#note_969" id="noteref_969" name="noteref_969"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">969</span></span></a> Amongst the Esthonians of the island of Oesel the last sheaf is called the Rye-boar, and the man who gets it is saluted with a cry of <span class="tei tei-q">“You have the Rye-boar on your back!”</span> In reply he strikes up a song, in which he prays for plenty.<a href="#note_970" id="noteref_970" name="noteref_970"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">970</span></span></a> At Kohlerwinkel, near Augsburg, at the close of the harvest, the last bunch of standing corn is cut down, stalk by stalk, by all the reapers in turn. He who cuts the last stalk <span class="tei tei-q">“gets the Sow,”</span> and is laughed at.<a href="#note_971" id="noteref_971" name="noteref_971"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">971</span></span></a> In other Swabian villages also the man who cuts the last corn <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Sow,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Rye-sow.”</span><a href="#note_972" id="noteref_972" name="noteref_972"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">972</span></span></a> In the Traunstein district, Upper Bavaria, the man who cuts the last handful of rye or wheat <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Sow,”</span> and is called Sow-driver.<a href="#note_973" id="noteref_973" name="noteref_973"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">973</span></span></a> At Bohlingen, near Radolfzell in Baden, the last sheaf is called the Rye-sow or the Wheat-sow, according to the crop; and at Röhrenbach in Baden the person who brings the last armful for the last sheaf is called the Corn-sow or the Oats-sow. And in the south-east of Baden the thresher who gives the last stroke at threshing, or is the last to hang up his flail on the wall, is called the Sow or the Rye-sow.<a href="#note_974" id="noteref_974" name="noteref_974"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">974</span></span></a> At Friedingen, in Swabia, the thresher who gives the last stroke is called Sow—Barley-sow, Corn-sow, or the like, according to the crop. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page299">[pg 299]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg299" name="Pg299"/> At Onstmettingen the man who gives the last stroke at threshing <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Sow”</span>; he is often bound up in a sheaf and dragged by a rope along the ground.<a href="#note_975" id="noteref_975" name="noteref_975"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">975</span></span></a> And, generally, in Swabia the man who gives the last stroke with the flail is called Sow. He may, however, rid himself of this invidious distinction by passing on to a neighbour the straw-rope, which is the badge of his position as Sow. So he goes to a house and throws the straw-rope into it, crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“There, I bring you the Sow.”</span> All the inmates give chase; and if they catch him they beat him, shut him up for several hours in the pig-sty, and oblige him to take the <span class="tei tei-q">“Sow”</span> away again.<a href="#note_976" id="noteref_976" name="noteref_976"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">976</span></span></a> In various parts of Upper Bavaria the man who gives the last stroke at threshing must <span class="tei tei-q">“carry the Pig”</span>—that is, either a straw effigy of a pig or merely a bundle of straw-ropes. This he carries to a neighbouring farm where the threshing is not finished, and throws it into the barn. If the threshers catch him they handle him roughly, beating him, blackening or dirtying his face, throwing him into filth, binding the Sow on his back, and so on; if the bearer of the Sow is a woman they cut off her hair. At the harvest supper or dinner the man who <span class="tei tei-q">“carried the Pig”</span> gets one or more dumplings made in the form of pigs; sometimes he gets a large dumpling and a number of small ones, all in pig form, the large one being called the sow and the small ones the sucking-pigs. Sometimes he has the right to be the first to put his hand into the dish and take out as many small dumplings (<span class="tei tei-q">“sucking-pigs”</span>) as he can, while the other threshers strike at his hand with spoons or sticks. When the dumplings are served up by the maid-servant, all the people at table cry <span class="tei tei-q">“Süz, süz, süz!”</span> that being the cry used in calling pigs. Sometimes after dinner the man who <span class="tei tei-q">“carried the Pig”</span> has his face blackened, and is set on a cart and drawn round the village by his fellows, followed by a crowd crying <span class="tei tei-q">“Süz, süz, süz!”</span> as if they were calling swine. Sometimes, after being wheeled round the village, he is flung on the dunghill.<a href="#note_977" id="noteref_977" name="noteref_977"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">977</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page300">[pg 300]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg300" name="Pg300"/>
					<p>Again, the corn-spirit in the form of a pig plays his part at sowing-time as well as at harvest At Neuautz, in Courland, when barley is sown for the first time in the year, the farmer's wife boils the chine of a pig along with the tail, and brings it to the sower on the field. He eats of it, but cuts off the tail and sticks it in the field; it is believed that the ears of corn will then grow as long as the tail.<a href="#note_978" id="noteref_978" name="noteref_978"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">978</span></span></a> Here the pig is the corn-spirit, whose fertilising power is sometimes supposed to lie especially in his tail.<a href="#note_979" id="noteref_979" name="noteref_979"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">979</span></span></a> As a pig he is put in the ground at sowing-time, and as a pig he reappears amongst the ripe corn at harvest. For amongst the neighbouring Esthonians, as we have seen,<a href="#note_980" id="noteref_980" name="noteref_980"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">980</span></span></a> the last sheaf is called the Rye-boar. Somewhat similar customs are observed in Germany. In the Salza district, near Meiningen, a certain bone in the pig is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Jew on the winnowing-fan.”</span> The flesh of this bone is boiled on Shrove Tuesday, but the bone is put amongst the ashes which the neighbours exchange as presents on St. Peter's Day (the twenty-second of February), and then mix with the seed-corn.<a href="#note_981" id="noteref_981" name="noteref_981"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">981</span></span></a> In the whole of Hesse, Meiningen, and other districts, people eat pea-soup with dried pig-ribs on Ash Wednesday or Candlemas. The ribs are then collected and hung in the room till sowing-time, when they are inserted in the sown field or in the seed-bag amongst the flax seed. This is thought to be an infallible specific against earth-fleas and moles, and to cause the flax to grow well and tall.<a href="#note_982" id="noteref_982" name="noteref_982"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">982</span></span></a> In many parts of White Russia people eat a roast lamb or sucking-pig at Easter, and then throw the bones backwards upon the fields, to preserve the corn from hail.<a href="#note_983" id="noteref_983" name="noteref_983"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">983</span></span></a></p>
					<p>But the idea of the corn-spirit as embodied in pig form is nowhere more clearly expressed than in the Scandinavian custom of the Yule Boar. In Sweden and Denmark at Yule (Christmas) it is the custom to bake a loaf in the form of a boar-pig. This is called the Yule Boar. The corn of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page301">[pg 301]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg301" name="Pg301"/> the last sheaf is often used to make it. All through Yule the Yule Boar stands on the table. Often it is kept till the sowing-time in spring, when part of it is mixed with the seed-corn and part given to the ploughmen and plough-horses or plough-oxen to eat, in the expectation of a good harvest.<a href="#note_984" id="noteref_984" name="noteref_984"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">984</span></span></a> In this custom the corn-spirit, immanent in the last sheaf, appears at midwinter in the form of a boar made from the corn of the last sheaf; and his quickening influence on the corn is shewn by mixing part of the Yule Boar with the seed-corn, and giving part of it to the ploughman and his cattle to eat. Similarly we saw that the Corn-wolf makes his appearance at midwinter, the time when the year begins to verge towards spring.<a href="#note_985" id="noteref_985" name="noteref_985"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">985</span></span></a> We may conjecture that the Yule straw, which Swedish peasants turn to various superstitious uses, comes, in part at least, from the sheaf out of which the Yule Boar is made. The Yule straw is long rye-straw, a portion of which is always set apart for this season. It is strewn over the floor at Christmas, and the peasants attribute many virtues to it. For example, they think that some of it scattered on the ground will make a barren field productive. Again, the peasant at Christmas seats himself on a log; and his eldest son or daughter, or the mother herself, if the children are not old enough, places a wisp of the Yule straw on his knee. From this he draws out single straws, and throws them, one by one, up to the ceiling; and as many as lodge in the rafters, so many will be the sheaves of rye he will have to thresh at harvest.<a href="#note_986" id="noteref_986" name="noteref_986"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">986</span></span></a> Again, it is only the Yule straw which may be used in binding the fruit-trees as a charm to fertilise them.<a href="#note_987" id="noteref_987" name="noteref_987"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">987</span></span></a> These uses of the Yule straw shew that it is believed to possess fertilising virtues analogous to those ascribed to the Yule Boar; we may therefore fairly conjecture that the Yule straw is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page302">[pg 302]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg302" name="Pg302"/> made from the same sheaf as the Yule Boar. Formerly a real boar was sacrificed at Christmas,<a href="#note_988" id="noteref_988" name="noteref_988"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">988</span></span></a> and apparently also a man in the character of the Yule Boar. This, at least, may perhaps be inferred from a Christmas custom still observed in Sweden. A man is wrapt up in a skin, and carries a wisp of straw in his mouth, so that the projecting straws look like the bristles of a boar. A knife is brought, and an old woman, with her face blackened, pretends to sacrifice him.<a href="#note_989" id="noteref_989" name="noteref_989"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">989</span></span></a></p>
					<p>On Christmas Eve in some parts of the Esthonian island of Oesel they bake a long cake with the two ends turned up. It is called the Christmas Boar, and stands on the table till the morning of New Year's Day, when it is distributed among the cattle. In other parts of the island the Christmas Boar is not a cake but a little pig born in March, which the housewife fattens secretly, often without the knowledge of the other members of the family. On Christmas Eve the little pig is secretly killed, then roasted in the oven, and set on the table standing on all fours, where it remains in this posture for several days. In other parts of the island, again, though the Christmas cake has neither the name nor the shape of a boar, it is kept till the New Year, when half of it is divided among all the members and all the quadrupeds of the family. The other half of the cake is kept till sowing-time comes round, when it is similarly distributed in the morning among human beings and beasts.<a href="#note_990" id="noteref_990" name="noteref_990"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">990</span></span></a> In other parts of Esthonia, again, the Christmas Boar, as it is called, is baked of the first rye cut at harvest; it has a conical shape and a cross is impressed on it with a pig's bone or a key, or three dints are made in it with a buckle or a piece of charcoal. It stands with a light beside it on the table all through the festal season. On New Year's Day and Epiphany, before sunrise, a little of the cake is crumbled with salt and given to the cattle. The rest is kept till the day when the cattle are driven out to pasture for the first time in spring. It is then put in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page303">[pg 303]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg303" name="Pg303"/> herdsman's bag, and at evening is divided among the cattle to guard them from magic and harm. In some places the Christmas Boar is partaken of by farm-servants and cattle at the time of the barley sowing, for the purpose of thereby producing a heavier crop.<a href="#note_991" id="noteref_991" name="noteref_991"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">991</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc61" name="toc61"/>
					<a id="pdf62" name="pdf62"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 12. On the Animal Embodiments of the Corn-spirit.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>So much for the animal embodiments of the corn-spirit as they are presented to us in the folk-customs of Northern Europe. These customs bring out clearly the sacramental character of the harvest-supper. The corn-spirit is conceived as embodied in an animal; this divine animal is slain, and its flesh and blood are partaken of by the harvesters. Thus, the cock, the goose, the hare, the cat, the goat, and the ox are eaten sacramentally by the harvesters, and the pig is eaten sacramentally by ploughmen in spring.<a href="#note_992" id="noteref_992" name="noteref_992"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">992</span></span></a> Again, as a substitute for the real flesh of the divine being, bread or dumplings are made in his image and eaten sacramentally; thus, pig-shaped dumplings are eaten by the harvesters, and loaves made in boar-shape (the Yule Boar) are eaten in spring by the ploughman and his cattle.</p>
					<p>The reader has probably remarked the complete parallelism between the conceptions of the corn-spirit in human and in animal form. The parallel may be here briefly resumed. When the corn waves in the wind it is said either that the Corn-mother or that the Corn-wolf, etc., is passing through the corn. Children are warned against straying in corn-fields either because the Corn-mother or because the Corn-wolf, etc., is there. In the last corn cut or the last sheaf threshed either the Corn-mother or the Corn-wolf, etc., is supposed to be present. The last sheaf is itself called either the Corn-mother or the Corn-wolf, etc., and is made up in the shape either of a woman or of a wolf, etc. The person who cuts, binds, or threshes the last sheaf is called either the Old Woman or the Wolf, etc., according to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page304">[pg 304]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg304" name="Pg304"/> the name bestowed on the sheaf itself. As in some places a sheaf made in human form and called the Maiden, the Mother of the Maize, etc., is kept from one harvest to the next in order to secure a continuance of the corn-spirit's blessing; so in some places the Harvest-cock and in others the flesh of the goat is kept for a similar purpose from one harvest to the next. As in some places the grain taken from the Corn-mother is mixed with the seed-corn in spring to make the crop abundant; so in some places the feathers of the cock, and in Sweden the Yule Boar, are kept till spring and mixed with the seed-corn for a like purpose. As part of the Corn-mother or Maiden is given to the cattle at Christmas or to the horses at the first ploughing, so part of the Yule Boar is given to the ploughing horses or oxen in spring. Lastly, the death of the corn-spirit is represented by killing or pretending to kill either his human or his animal representative; and the worshippers partake sacramentally either of the actual body and blood of the representative of the divinity, or of bread made in his likeness.</p>
					<p>Other animal forms assumed by the corn-spirit are the stag, roe, sheep, bear, ass, mouse, stork, swan, and kite.<a href="#note_993" id="noteref_993" name="noteref_993"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">993</span></span></a> If it is asked why the corn-spirit should be thought to appear in the form of an animal and of so many different animals, we may reply that to primitive man the simple appearance of an animal or bird among the corn is probably enough to suggest a mysterious link between the creature and the corn; and when we remember that in the old days, before fields were fenced in, all kinds of animals must have been free to roam over them, we need not wonder that the corn-spirit should have been identified even with large animals like the horse and cow, which nowadays could not, except by a rare accident, be found straying in an English corn-field. This explanation applies with peculiar force to the very common case in which the animal embodiment of the corn-spirit is believed to lurk in the last standing corn. For at harvest a number of wild animals, such as hares, rabbits, and partridges, are commonly driven by the progress of the reaping into the last patch of standing corn, and make their escape from it as it is being cut down. So <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page305">[pg 305]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg305" name="Pg305"/> regularly does this happen that reapers and others often stand round the last patch of corn armed with sticks or guns, with which they kill the animals as they dart out of their last refuge among the stalks. Now, primitive man, to whom magical changes of shape seem perfectly credible, finds it most natural that the spirit of the corn, driven from his home in the ripe grain, should make his escape in the form of the animal which is seen to rush out of the last patch of corn as it falls under the scythe of the reaper. Thus the identification of the corn-spirit with an animal is analogous to the identification of him with a passing stranger. As the sudden appearance of a stranger near the harvest-field or threshing-floor is, to the primitive mind, enough to identify him as the spirit of the corn escaping from the cut or threshed corn, so the sudden appearance of an animal issuing from the cut corn is enough to identify it with the corn-spirit escaping from his ruined home. The two identifications are so analogous that they can hardly be dissociated in any attempt to explain them. Those who look to some other principle than the one here suggested for the explanation of the latter identification are bound to shew that their theory covers the former identification also.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page307">[pg 307]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg307" name="Pg307"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
