<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-3-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter V. The Nature of Osiris.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. Osiris a Corn-God.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>The foregoing survey of the myth and ritual of Osiris may suffice to prove that in one of his aspects the god was a personification of the corn, which may be said to die and come to life again every year. Through all the pomp and glamour with which in later times the priests had invested his worship, the conception of him as the corn-god comes clearly out in the festival of his death and resurrection, which was celebrated in the month of Khoiak and at a later period in the month of Athyr. That festival appears to have been essentially a festival of sowing, which properly fell at the time when the husbandman actually committed the seed to the earth. On that occasion an effigy of the corn-god, moulded of earth and corn, was buried with funeral rites in the ground in order that, dying there, he might come to life again with the new crops. The ceremony was, in fact, a charm to ensure the growth of the corn by sympathetic magic, and we may conjecture that as such it was practised in a simple form by every Egyptian farmer on his fields long before it was adopted and transfigured by the priests in the stately ritual of the temple. In the modern, but doubtless ancient, Arab custom of burying <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man,”</span> namely, a sheaf of wheat, in the harvest-field and praying that he may return from the dead,<a href="#note_205" id="noteref_205" name="noteref_205"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">205</span></span></a> we see the germ out of which the worship of the corn-god Osiris was probably developed. Earth.<a href="#note_206" id="noteref_206" name="noteref_206"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">206</span></span></a> What more appropriate parentage could be invented for the corn which springs from the ground that has been fertilized by the water of heaven? It is true that the land of Egypt owed its fertility directly to the Nile and not to showers; but the inhabitants must have known or guessed that the great river in its turn was fed by the rains which fell in the far interior. Again, the legend that Osiris was the first to teach men the use of corn<a href="#note_207" id="noteref_207" name="noteref_207"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">207</span></span></a> would be most naturally told of the corn-god himself. Further, the story that his mangled remains were scattered up and down the land and buried in different places may be a mythical way of expressing either the sowing or the winnowing of the grain. The latter interpretation is supported by the tale that Isis placed the severed limbs of Osiris on a corn-sieve.<a href="#note_208" id="noteref_208" name="noteref_208"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">208</span></span></a> Or more probably the legend may be a reminiscence of a custom of slaying a human victim, perhaps a representative of the corn-spirit, and distributing his flesh or scattering his ashes over the fields to fertilize them. In modern Europe the figure of Death is sometimes torn in pieces, and the fragments are then buried in the ground to make the crops grow well,<a href="#note_209" id="noteref_209" name="noteref_209"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">209</span></span></a> and in other parts of the world human victims are treated in the same way.<a href="#note_210" id="noteref_210" name="noteref_210"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">210</span></span></a> With regard to the ancient Egyptians we have it on the authority of Manetho that they used to burn red-haired men and scatter their ashes with winnowing fans,<a href="#note_211" id="noteref_211" name="noteref_211"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">211</span></span></a> and it is highly significant that this barbarous sacrifice was offered by the kings at the grave of Osiris.<a href="#note_212" id="noteref_212" name="noteref_212"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">212</span></span></a> We may conjecture that the victims represented Osiris himself, who was annually slain, dismembered, and buried in their persons that he might quicken the seed in the earth.</p>
					<p>Possibly in prehistoric times the kings themselves played the part of the god and were slain and dismembered in that character. Set as well as Osiris is said to have been torn in pieces after a reign of eighteen days, which was commemorated by an annual festival of the same length.<a href="#note_213" id="noteref_213" name="noteref_213"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">213</span></span></a> According to one story Romulus, the first king of Rome, was cut in pieces by the senators, who buried the fragments of him in the ground;<a href="#note_214" id="noteref_214" name="noteref_214"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">214</span></span></a> and the traditional day of his death, the seventh of July, was celebrated with certain curious rites, which were apparently connected with the artificial fertilization of the fig.<a href="#note_215" id="noteref_215" name="noteref_215"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">215</span></span></a> Again, Greek legend told how Pentheus, king of Thebes, and Lycurgus, king of the Thracian Edonians, opposed the vine-god Dionysus, and how the impious monarchs were rent in pieces, the one by the frenzied Bacchanals, the other by horses.<a href="#note_216" id="noteref_216" name="noteref_216"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">216</span></span></a> These Greek traditions may well be distorted reminiscences of a custom of sacrificing human beings, and especially divine kings, in the character of Dionysus, a god who resembled Osiris in many points and was said like him to have been torn limb from limb.<a href="#note_217" id="noteref_217" name="noteref_217"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">217</span></span></a> We are told that in Chios men were rent in pieces as a sacrifice to Dionysus;<a href="#note_218" id="noteref_218" name="noteref_218"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">218</span></span></a> and since they died the same death as their god, it is reasonable to suppose that they personated him. The story that the Thracian Orpheus was similarly torn limb from limb by the Bacchanals seems to indicate that he too perished in the character of the god whose death he died.<a href="#note_219" id="noteref_219" name="noteref_219"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">219</span></span></a> It is significant that the Thracian Lycurgus, king of the Edonians, is said to have been put to death in order that the ground, which had ceased to be fruitful, might regain its fertility.<a href="#note_220" id="noteref_220" name="noteref_220"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">220</span></span></a> In some Thracian villages at Carnival time a custom is still annually observed, which may well be a mitigation of an ancient practice of putting a man, perhaps a king, to death in the character of Dionysus for the sake of the crops. A man disguised in goatskins and fawnskins, the livery of Dionysus, is shot at and falls down as dead. A pretence is made of flaying his body and of mourning over him, but afterwards he comes to life again. Further, a plough is dragged about the village and seed is scattered, while prayers are said that the wheat, rye, and barley may be plentiful. One town (Viza), where these customs are observed, was the capital of the old Thracian kings. In another town (Kosti, near the Black Sea) the principal masker is called the king. He wears goatskins or sheepskins, and is attended by a boy who dispenses wine to the people. The king himself carries seed, which he casts on the ground before the church, after being invited to throw it on two bands of married and unmarried men respectively. Finally, he is stripped of the skins and thrown into the river.<a href="#note_221" id="noteref_221" name="noteref_221"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">221</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Further, we read of a Norwegian king, Halfdan the Black, whose body was cut up and buried in different parts of his kingdom for the sake of ensuring the fruitfulness of the earth. He is said to have been drowned at the age of forty through the breaking of the ice in spring. What followed his death is thus related by the old Norse historian Snorri Sturluson: <span class="tei tei-q">“He had been the most prosperous (literally, blessed with abundance) of all kings. So greatly did men value him that when the news came that he was dead and his body removed to Hringariki and intended for burial there, the chief men from Raumariki and Westfold and Heithmörk came and all requested that they might take his body with them and bury it in their various provinces; they thought that it would bring abundance to those who obtained it. Eventually it was settled that the body was distributed in four places. The head was laid in a barrow at Steinn in Hringariki, and each party took away their own share and buried it. All these barrows are called Halfdan's barrows.”</span><a href="#note_222" id="noteref_222" name="noteref_222"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">222</span></span></a> It should be remembered that this Halfdan belonged to the family of the Ynglings, who traced their descent from Frey, the great Scandinavian god of fertility.<a href="#note_223" id="noteref_223" name="noteref_223"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">223</span></span></a> Frey himself is said to have reigned as king of Sweden at Upsala. The years of his reign were plenteous, and the people laid the plenty to his account. So when he died, they would not burn him, as it had been customary to do with the dead before his time; but they resolved to preserve his body, believing that, so long as it remained in Sweden, the land would have abundance and peace. Therefore they reared a great mound, and put him in it, and sacrificed to him for plenty and peace ever afterwards. And for three years after his death they poured the tribute to him into the mound, as if he were alive; the gold they poured in by one window, the silver by a second, and the copper by a third.<a href="#note_224" id="noteref_224" name="noteref_224"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">224</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The natives of Kiwai, an island lying off the mouth of the Fly River in British New Guinea, tell of a certain magician named Segera, who had sago for his totem. When his son died, the death was set down to the magic of an enemy, and the bereaved father was so angry that by his spells he caused the whole crop of sago in the country to fail; only in his own garden the sago grew as luxuriantly as ever. When many had died of famine, the people went to him and begged him to remove the spells which he had cast on the sago palms, so that they might eat food and live. The magician, touched with remorse and pity, went round planting a sago shoot in every garden, and the shoots flourished, sago was plentiful once more, and the famine came to an end. When Segera was old and ill, he told the people that he would soon die, but that, nevertheless, he would cause their gardens to thrive. Accordingly, he instructed them that when he was dead they should cut him up and place pieces of his flesh in their gardens, but his head was to be buried in his own garden. Of him it is said that he outlived the ordinary age, and that no man knew his father, but that he made the sago good and no one was hungry any more. Old men who were alive a few years ago affirmed that they had known Segera in their youth, and the general opinion of the Kiwai people seems to be that Segera died not more than two generations ago.<a href="#note_225" id="noteref_225" name="noteref_225"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">225</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Taken all together, these legends point to a widespread practice of dismembering the body of a king or magician and burying the pieces in different parts of the country in order to ensure the fertility of the ground and probably also the fecundity of man and beast. Whether regarded as the descendant of a god, as himself divine, or simply as a mighty enchanter, the king was believed to radiate magical virtue for the good of his subjects, quickening the seed in the earth and in the womb. This radiation of reproductive energy did not cease with his life; hence the people deemed it essential to preserve his body as a pledge of the continued prosperity of the country. It would be natural to imagine that the spot where the dead king was buried would enjoy a more than ordinary share of his blessed influence, and accordingly disputes would almost inevitably arise between different districts for the exclusive possession of so powerful a talisman. These disputes could be settled and local jealousies appeased by dividing the precious body between the rival claimants, in order that all should benefit in equal measure by its life-giving properties. This was certainly done in Norway with the body of Halfdan the Black, the descendant of the harvest-god Frey; it appears to have been done with the body of Segera, the sago-magician of Kiwai; and we may conjecture that in prehistoric times it was done with the bodies of Egyptian kings, who personated Osiris, the god of fertility in general and of the corn in particular. At least such a practice would account for the legend of the mangling of the god's body and the distribution of the pieces throughout Egypt.</p>
					<p>In this connexion the story that the genital member of Osiris was missing when Isis pieced together his mutilated body,<a href="#note_226" id="noteref_226" name="noteref_226"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">226</span></span></a> may not be without significance. When a Zulu medicine-man wishes to make the crops grow well, he will take the body of a man who has died in full vigour and cut minute portions of tissue from the foot, the leg, the arm, the face, and the nail of a single finger in order to compound a fertilizing medicine out of them. But the most important part of the medicine consists of the dead man's generative organs, which are removed entire. All these pieces of the corpse are fried with herbs on a slow fire, then ground to powder, and sown over the fields.<a href="#note_227" id="noteref_227" name="noteref_227"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">227</span></span></a> We have seen that similarly the Egyptians scattered the ashes of human victims by means of winnowing-fans;<a href="#note_228" id="noteref_228" name="noteref_228"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">228</span></span></a> and if my explanation of the practice is correct, it may well have been that they, like the Zulus, attributed a special power of reproduction to the genital organs, and therefore carefully excised them from the body of the victim in order to impart their virtue to the fields. I have conjectured that a similar use was made of the severed portions of the priests of Attis.<a href="#note_229" id="noteref_229" name="noteref_229"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">229</span></span></a></p>
					<p>To an ancient Egyptian, with his firm belief in a personal immortality dependent on the integrity of the body, the prospect of mutilation after death must have been very repugnant; and we may suppose that the kings offered a strenuous resistance to the custom and finally succeeded in abolishing it. They may have represented to the people that they would attain their object better by keeping the royal corpse intact than by frittering it away in small pieces. Their subjects apparently acquiesced in the argument, or at all events in the conclusion; yet the mountains of masonry beneath which the old Egyptian kings lay buried may have been intended to guard them from the superstitious devotion of their friends quite as much as from the hostile designs of their enemies, since both alike must have been under a strong temptation to violate the sanctity of the grave in order to possess themselves of bodies which were believed to be endowed with magical virtue of the most tremendous potency. In antiquity the safety of the state was often believed to depend on the possession of a talisman, which sometimes consisted of the bones of a king or hero. Hence the graves of such persons were sometimes kept secret.<a href="#note_230" id="noteref_230" name="noteref_230"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">230</span></span></a> The violation of royal tombs by a conqueror was not a mere insult: it was a deadly blow struck at the prosperity of the kingdom. Hence Ashurbanipal carried off to Assyria the bones of the kings of Elam, believing that thus he gave their shades no repose and deprived them of food and drink.<a href="#note_231" id="noteref_231" name="noteref_231"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">231</span></span></a> The Moabites burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime.<a href="#note_232" id="noteref_232" name="noteref_232"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">232</span></span></a> Lysimachus is said to have opened the graves of the kings of Epirus and scattered the bones of the dead.<a href="#note_233" id="noteref_233" name="noteref_233"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">233</span></span></a></p>
					<p>With savage and barbarous tribes in like manner it is not unusual to violate the sanctity of the tomb either for the purpose of wreaking vengeance on the dead or more commonly perhaps for the sake of gaining possession of the bones and converting them to magical uses. Hence the Mpongwe kings of the Gaboon region in West Africa are buried secretly lest their heads should fall into the hands of men of another tribe, who would make a powerful fetish out of the brains.<a href="#note_234" id="noteref_234" name="noteref_234"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">234</span></span></a> Again, in Togoland, West Africa, the kings of the Ho tribe are buried with great secrecy in the forest, and a false grave is made ostentatiously in the king's house. None but his personal retainers and a single daughter know where the king's real grave is. The intention of this secret burial is to prevent enemies from digging up the corpse and cutting off the head.<a href="#note_235" id="noteref_235" name="noteref_235"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">235</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“The heads of important chiefs in the Calabar districts are usually cut off from the body on burial and kept secretly for fear the head, and thereby the spirit, of the dead chief, should be stolen from the town. If it were stolen it would be not only a great advantage to its new possessor, but a great danger to the chief's old town, because he would know all the peculiar ju-ju relating to it. For each town has a peculiar one, kept exceedingly secret, in addition to the general ju-jus, and this secret one would then be in the hands of the new owners of the spirit.”</span><a href="#note_236" id="noteref_236" name="noteref_236"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">236</span></span></a> The graves of Basuto chiefs are kept secret lest certain more or less imaginary witches and wizards called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Baloi</span></span>, who haunt tombs, should get possession of the bones and work evil magic with them.<a href="#note_237" id="noteref_237" name="noteref_237"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">237</span></span></a> In the Thonga tribe of South Africa, when a chief dies, he is buried secretly by night in a sacred wood, and few people know the place of the grave. With some clans of the tribe it is customary to level the mound over the grave so that no sign whatever remains to show where the body has been buried. This is said to be done lest enemies should exhume the corpse and cut off the ears, the diaphragm, and other parts in order to make powerful war-charms out of them.<a href="#note_238" id="noteref_238" name="noteref_238"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">238</span></span></a> By many tribes in Fiji <span class="tei tei-q">“the burial-place of their chief is kept a profound secret, lest those whom he injured during his lifetime should revenge themselves by digging up and insulting or even eating his body. In some places the dead chief is buried in his own house, and armed warriors of his mother's kin keep watch night and day over his grave. After a time his bones are taken up and carried by night to some far-away inaccessible cave in the mountains, whose position is known only to a few trustworthy men. Ladders are constructed to enable them to reach the cave, and are taken down when the bones have been deposited there. Many frightful stories are told in connection with this custom, and it is certain that not even decomposition itself avails to baulk the last revenge of cannibals if they can find the grave. The very bones of the dead chief are not secure from the revenge of those whose friends he killed during his lifetime, or whom he otherwise so exasperated by the tyrannous exercise of his power as to fill their hearts with a deadly hate. In one instance within my own knowledge, when the hiding-place was discovered, the bones were taken away, scraped, and stewed down into a horrible hell-broth.”</span><a href="#note_239" id="noteref_239" name="noteref_239"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">239</span></span></a> When a Melanesian dies who enjoyed a reputation for magical powers in his lifetime, his friends will sometimes hold a sham burial and keep the real grave secret for fear that men might come and dig up the skull and bones to make charms with them.<a href="#note_240" id="noteref_240" name="noteref_240"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">240</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Beliefs and practices of this sort are by no means confined to agricultural peoples. Among the Koniags of Alaska <span class="tei tei-q">“in ancient times the pursuit of the whale was accompanied by numerous superstitious observances kept a secret by the hunters. Lieutenant Davidof states that the whalers preserved the bodies of brave or distinguished men in secluded caves, and before proceeding upon a whale-hunt would carry these dead bodies into a stream and then drink of the water thus tainted. One famous whaler of Kadiak who desired to flatter Baranof, the first chief manager of the Russian colonies, said to him, <span class="tei tei-q">‘When you die I shall try to steal your body,’</span> intending thus to express his great respect for Baranof. On the occasion of the death of a whaler his fellows would cut the body into pieces, each man taking one of them for the purpose of rubbing his spear-heads therewith. These pieces were dried or otherwise preserved, and were frequently taken into the canoes as talismans.”</span><a href="#note_241" id="noteref_241" name="noteref_241"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">241</span></span></a></p>
					<p>To return to the human victims whose ashes the Egyptians scattered with winnowing-fans,<a href="#note_242" id="noteref_242" name="noteref_242"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">242</span></span></a> the red hair of these unfortunates was probably significant. If I am right, the custom of sacrificing such persons was not a mere way of wreaking a national spite on fair-haired foreigners, whom the black-haired Egyptians of old, like the black-haired Chinese of modern times, may have regarded as red-haired devils. For in Egypt the oxen which were sacrificed had also to be red; a single black or white hair found on the beast would have disqualified it for the sacrifice.<a href="#note_243" id="noteref_243" name="noteref_243"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">243</span></span></a> If, as I conjecture, these human sacrifices were intended to promote the growth of the crops—and the winnowing of their ashes seems to support this view—red-haired victims were perhaps selected as best fitted to personate the spirit of the ruddy grain. For when a god is represented by a living person, it is natural that the human representative should be chosen on the ground of his supposed resemblance to the divine original. Hence the ancient Mexicans, conceiving the maize as a personal being who went through the whole course of life between seed-time and harvest, sacrificed new-born babes when the maize was sown, older children when it had sprouted, and so on till it was fully ripe, when they sacrificed old men.<a href="#note_244" id="noteref_244" name="noteref_244"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">244</span></span></a> A name for Osiris was the <span class="tei tei-q">“crop”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“harvest”</span>;<a href="#note_245" id="noteref_245" name="noteref_245"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">245</span></span></a> and the ancients sometimes explained him as a personification of the corn.<a href="#note_246" id="noteref_246" name="noteref_246"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">246</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. Osiris a Tree-Spirit.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>But Osiris was more than a spirit of the corn; he was also a tree-spirit, and this may perhaps have been his primitive character, since the worship of trees is naturally older in the history of religion than the worship of the cereals. However that may have been, to an agricultural people like the Egyptians, who depended almost wholly on their crops, the corn-god was naturally a far more important personage than the tree-god, and attracted a larger share of their devotion. The character of Osiris as a tree-spirit was represented very graphically in a ceremony described by Firmicus Maternus.<a href="#note_247" id="noteref_247" name="noteref_247"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">247</span></span></a> A pine-tree having been cut down, the centre was hollowed out, and with the wood thus excavated an image of Osiris was made, which was then buried like a corpse in the hollow of the tree. It is hard to imagine how the conception of a tree as tenanted by a personal being could be more plainly expressed. The image of Osiris thus made was kept for a year and then burned, exactly as was done with the image of Attis which was attached to the pine-tree.<a href="#note_248" id="noteref_248" name="noteref_248"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">248</span></span></a> The ceremony of cutting the tree, as described by Firmicus Maternus, appears to be alluded to by Plutarch.<a href="#note_249" id="noteref_249" name="noteref_249"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">249</span></span></a> It was probably the ritual counterpart of the mythical discovery of the body of Osiris enclosed in the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">erica</span></span>-tree.<a href="#note_250" id="noteref_250" name="noteref_250"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">250</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Now we know from the monuments that at Busiris, Memphis, and elsewhere the great festival of Osiris closed on the thirtieth of Khoiak with the setting up of a remarkable pillar known as the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tatu</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tat</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tet</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">dad</span></span>, or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ded</span></span>. This was a column with four or five cross-bars, like superposed capitals, at the top. The whole roughly resembled a telegraph-post with the cross-pieces which support the wires. Sometimes on the monuments a human form is given to the pillar by carving a grotesque face on it, robing the lower part, crowning the top with the symbols of Osiris, and adding two arms which hold two other characteristic emblems of the god, the crook and the scourge or flail. On a Theban tomb the king himself, assisted by his relations and a priest, is represented hauling at the ropes by which the pillar is being raised, while the queen looks on and her sixteen daughters accompany the ceremony with the music of rattles and sistrums. Again, in the hall of the Osirian mysteries at Abydos the King Sety I. and the goddess Isis are depicted raising the column between them. In Egyptian theology the pillar was interpreted as the backbone of Osiris, and whatever its meaning may have been, it was one of the holiest symbols of the national religion. It might very well be a conventional way of representing a tree stripped of its leaves; and if Osiris was a tree-spirit, the bare trunk and branches might naturally be described as his backbone. The setting up of the column would thus, as several modern scholars believe, shadow forth the resurrection of the god, and the importance of the occasion would explain and justify the prominent part which the king appears to have taken in the ceremony.<a href="#note_251" id="noteref_251" name="noteref_251"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">251</span></span></a> It is to be noted that in the myth of Osiris the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">erica</span></span>-tree which shot up and enclosed his dead body, was cut down by a king and turned by him into a pillar of his house.<a href="#note_252" id="noteref_252" name="noteref_252"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">252</span></span></a> We can hardly doubt, therefore, that this incident of the legend was supposed to be dramatically set forth in the erection of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ded</span></span> column by the king. Like the similar custom of cutting a pine-tree and fastening an image to it in the rites of Attis, the ceremony may have belonged to that class of customs of which the bringing in of the May-pole is among the most familiar. The association of the king and queen of Egypt with the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ded</span></span> pillar reminds us of the association of a King and Queen of May with the May-pole.<a href="#note_253" id="noteref_253" name="noteref_253"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">253</span></span></a> The resemblance may be more than superficial.</p>
					<p>In the hall of Osiris at Denderah the coffin containing the hawk-headed mummy of the god is clearly depicted as enclosed within a tree, apparently a conifer, the trunk and branches of which are seen above and below the coffin.<a href="#note_254" id="noteref_254" name="noteref_254"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">254</span></span></a> The scene thus corresponds closely both to the myth and to the ceremony described by Firmicus Maternus. In another scene at Denderah a tree of the same sort is represented growing between the dead and the reviving Osiris, as if on purpose to indicate that the tree was the symbol of the divine resurrection.<a href="#note_255" id="noteref_255" name="noteref_255"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">255</span></span></a> A pine-cone often appears on the monuments as an offering presented to Osiris, and a manuscript of the Louvre speaks of the cedar as sprung from him.<a href="#note_256" id="noteref_256" name="noteref_256"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">256</span></span></a> The sycamore and the tamarisk were also his trees. In inscriptions he is spoken of as residing in them;<a href="#note_257" id="noteref_257" name="noteref_257"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">257</span></span></a> and in tombs his mother Nut is often portrayed standing in the midst of a sycamore-tree and pouring a libation for the benefit of the dead.<a href="#note_258" id="noteref_258" name="noteref_258"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">258</span></span></a> In one of the Pyramid Texts we read, <span class="tei tei-q">“Hail to thee, Sycamore, which enclosest the god”</span>;<a href="#note_259" id="noteref_259" name="noteref_259"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">259</span></span></a> and in certain temples the statue of Osiris used to be placed for seven days upon branches of sycamores. The explanation appended in the sacred texts declares that the placing of the image on the tree was intended to recall the seven months passed by Osiris in the womb of his mother Nut, the goddess of the sycamore.<a href="#note_260" id="noteref_260" name="noteref_260"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">260</span></span></a> The rite recalls the story that Adonis was born after ten months' gestation from a myrrh-tree.<a href="#note_261" id="noteref_261" name="noteref_261"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">261</span></span></a> Further, in a sepulchre at How (Diospolis Parva) a tamarisk is depicted overshadowing the tomb of Osiris, while a bird is perched among the branches with the significant legend <span class="tei tei-q">“the soul of Osiris,”</span><a href="#note_262" id="noteref_262" name="noteref_262"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">262</span></span></a> showing that the spirit of the dead god was believed to haunt his sacred tree.<a href="#note_263" id="noteref_263" name="noteref_263"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">263</span></span></a> Again, in the series of sculptures which illustrate the mystic history of Osiris in the great temple of Isis at Philae, a tamarisk is figured with two men pouring water on it. The accompanying inscription leaves no doubt, says Brugsch, that the verdure of the earth was believed to be connected with the verdure of the tree, and that the sculpture refers to the grave of Osiris at Philae, of which Plutarch tells us that it was overshadowed by a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">methide</span></span> plant, taller than any olive-tree. This sculpture, it may be observed, occurs in the same chamber in which the god is represented as a corpse with ears of corn springing from him.<a href="#note_264" id="noteref_264" name="noteref_264"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">264</span></span></a> In inscriptions he is referred to as <span class="tei tei-q">“the one in the tree,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the solitary one in the acacia,”</span> and so forth.<a href="#note_265" id="noteref_265" name="noteref_265"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">265</span></span></a> On the monuments he sometimes appears as a mummy covered with a tree or with plants;<a href="#note_266" id="noteref_266" name="noteref_266"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">266</span></span></a> and trees are represented growing from his grave.<a href="#note_267" id="noteref_267" name="noteref_267"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">267</span></span></a></p>
					<p>It accords with the character of Osiris as a tree-spirit that his worshippers were forbidden to injure fruit-trees, and with his character as a god of vegetation in general that they were not allowed to stop up wells of water, which are so important for the irrigation of hot southern lands.<a href="#note_268" id="noteref_268" name="noteref_268"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">268</span></span></a> According to one legend, he taught men to train the vine to poles, to prune its superfluous foliage, and to extract the juice of the grape.<a href="#note_269" id="noteref_269" name="noteref_269"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">269</span></span></a> In the papyrus of Nebseni, written about 1550 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, Osiris is depicted sitting in a shrine, from the roof of which hang clusters of grapes;<a href="#note_270" id="noteref_270" name="noteref_270"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">270</span></span></a> and in the papyrus of the royal scribe Nekht we see the god enthroned in front of a pool, from the banks of which a luxuriant vine, with many bunches of grapes, grows towards the green face of the seated deity.<a href="#note_271" id="noteref_271" name="noteref_271"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">271</span></span></a> The ivy was sacred to him, and was called his plant because it is always green.<a href="#note_272" id="noteref_272" name="noteref_272"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">272</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 3. Osiris a God of Fertility.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>As a god of vegetation Osiris was naturally conceived as a god of creative energy in general, since men at a certain stage of evolution fail to distinguish between the reproductive powers of animals and of plants. Hence a striking feature in his worship was the coarse but expressive symbolism by which this aspect of his nature was presented to the eye not merely of the initiated but of the multitude. At his festival women used to go about the villages singing songs in his praise and carrying obscene images of him which they set in motion by means of strings.<a href="#note_273" id="noteref_273" name="noteref_273"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">273</span></span></a> The custom was probably a charm to ensure the growth of the crops. A similar image of him, decked with all the fruits of the earth, is said to have stood in a temple before a figure of Isis,<a href="#note_274" id="noteref_274" name="noteref_274"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">274</span></span></a> and in the chambers dedicated to him at Philae the dead god is portrayed lying on his bier in an attitude which indicates in the plainest way that even in death his generative virtue was not extinct but only suspended, ready to prove a source of life and fertility to the world when the opportunity should offer.<a href="#note_275" id="noteref_275" name="noteref_275"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">275</span></span></a> Hymns addressed to Osiris contain allusions to this important side of his nature. In one of them it is said that the world waxes green in triumph through him; and another declares, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou art the father and mother of mankind, they live on thy breath, they subsist on the flesh of thy body.”</span><a href="#note_276" id="noteref_276" name="noteref_276"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">276</span></span></a> We may conjecture that in this paternal aspect he was supposed, like other gods of fertility, to bless men and women with offspring, and that the processions at his festival were intended to promote this object as well as to quicken the seed in the ground. It would be to misjudge ancient religion to denounce as lewd and profligate the emblems and the ceremonies which the Egyptians employed for the purpose of giving effect to this conception of the divine power. The ends which they proposed to themselves in these rites were natural and laudable; only the means they adopted to compass them were mistaken. A similar fallacy induced the Greeks to adopt a like symbolism in their Dionysiac festivals, and the superficial but striking resemblance thus produced between the two religions has perhaps more than anything else misled inquirers, both ancient and modern, into identifying worships which, though certainly akin in nature, are perfectly distinct and independent in origin.<a href="#note_277" id="noteref_277" name="noteref_277"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">277</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 4. Osiris a God of the Dead.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>We have seen that in one of his aspects Osiris was the ruler and judge of the dead.<a href="#note_278" id="noteref_278" name="noteref_278"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">278</span></span></a> To a people like the Egyptians, who not only believed in a life beyond the grave but actually spent much of their time, labour, and money in preparing for it, this office of the god must have appeared hardly, if at all, less important than his function of making the earth to bring forth its fruits in due season. We may assume that in the faith of his worshippers the two provinces of the god were intimately connected. In laying their dead in the grave they committed them to his keeping who could raise them from the dust to life eternal, even as he caused the seed to spring from the ground. Of that faith the corn-stuffed effigies of Osiris found in Egyptian tombs furnish an eloquent and unequivocal testimony.<a href="#note_279" id="noteref_279" name="noteref_279"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">279</span></span></a> They were at once an emblem and an instrument of resurrection. Thus from the sprouting of the grain the ancient Egyptians drew an augury of human immortality. They are not the only people who have built the same far-reaching hopes on the same slender foundation. <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou fool, that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: but God giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body. So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption: it is sown in weakness; it is raised in power: it is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body.”</span><a href="#note_280" id="noteref_280" name="noteref_280"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">280</span></span></a></p>
					<p>A god who thus fed his people with his own broken body in this life, and who held out to them a promise of a blissful eternity in a better world hereafter, naturally reigned supreme in their affections. We need not wonder, therefore, that in Egypt the worship of the other gods was overshadowed by that of Osiris, and that while they were revered each in his own district, he and his divine partner Isis were adored in all.<a href="#note_281" id="noteref_281" name="noteref_281"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">281</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
