<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc39" name="toc39"/>
				<a id="pdf40" name="pdf40"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter XV. The Propitiation of Vermin by Farmers.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc41" name="toc41"/>
					<a id="pdf42" name="pdf42"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. The Enemies of the Crops.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Propitiation of the vermin which infest crops and cattle in Europe.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Besides the animals which primitive man dreads for their strength and ferocity, and those which he reveres on account of the benefits which he expects from them, there is another class of creatures which he sometimes deems it necessary to conciliate by worship and sacrifice. These are the vermin that infest his crops and his cattle. To rid himself of these deadly foes the farmer has recourse to many superstitious devices, of which, though some are meant to destroy or intimidate the vermin, others aim at propitiating them and persuading them by fair means to spare the fruits of the earth and the herds. Thus Esthonian peasants, in the island of Oesel, stand in great awe of the weevil, an insect which is exceedingly destructive to the grain. They give it a fine name, and if a child is about to kill a weevil they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Don't do it; the more we hurt him, the more he hurts us.”</span> If they find a weevil they bury it in the earth instead of killing it. Some even put the weevil under a stone in the field and offer corn to it. They think that thus it is appeased and does less harm.<a href="#note_801" id="noteref_801" name="noteref_801"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">801</span></span></a> Amongst the Saxons of Transylvania, in order to keep sparrows from the corn, the sower begins by throwing the first handful of seed backwards over his head, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“That is for you, sparrows.”</span> To guard the corn against the attacks of leaf-flies (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Erdflöhe</span></span>) he shuts his eyes and scatters three handfuls of oats in different directions. Having made this offering to the leaf-flies he feels sure that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page275">[pg 275]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg275" name="Pg275"/> they will spare the corn. A Transylvanian way of securing the crops against all birds, beasts, and insects, is this: after he has finished sowing, the sower goes once more from end to end of the field imitating the gesture of sowing, but with an empty hand. As he does so he says, <span class="tei tei-q">“I sow this for the animals; I sow it for everything that flies and creeps, that walks and stands, that sings and springs, in the name of God the Father, etc.”</span><a href="#note_802" id="noteref_802" name="noteref_802"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">802</span></span></a> The Huzuls of the Carpathians believe that the bite of the weasel is poisonous and that the animal commits ravages on the cattle. Yet they take care never to kill a weasel, lest the surviving kinsfolk of the deceased should avenge his death on the herds of his murderer. They even celebrate a festival of weasels either on St. Matthew's day (9th August, old style, 21st August, new style), or on St. Catherine's day (24th November, old style, 6th December, new style). On that day no work may be done, lest the weasels should harm the herds.<a href="#note_803" id="noteref_803" name="noteref_803"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">803</span></span></a> The following is a German way of freeing a garden from caterpillars. After sunset or at midnight the mistress of the house, or another female member of the family, walks all round the garden dragging a broom after her. She must not look behind her, and must keep murmuring, <span class="tei tei-q">“Good evening, Mother Caterpillar, you shall come with your husband to church.”</span> The garden gate is left open till the following morning.<a href="#note_804" id="noteref_804" name="noteref_804"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">804</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Similar attempts made to propitiate vermin by savages.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The attempts thus made by European peasants to mollify the rage and avert the ravages of vermin have their counterpart in the similar observances of savages. When the Matabele find caterpillars in their fields they put an ear of corn in a calabash, fill the vessel up with caterpillars, and set it down on a path leading to another village, hoping thus to induce the insects to migrate thither.<a href="#note_805" id="noteref_805" name="noteref_805"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">805</span></span></a> The Yabim of German New Guinea imagine that the caterpillars and worms which infest their fields of taro are animated by the souls of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page276">[pg 276]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg276" name="Pg276"/> the human dead; hence in order to rid the crops of these vermin they politely request the insects to leave the fields and repair to the village. <span class="tei tei-q">“Ye locusts, worms, and caterpillars,”</span> they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“who have died or hanged yourselves, or have been killed by a falling log or devoured by a shark, go into the village.”</span><a href="#note_806" id="noteref_806" name="noteref_806"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">806</span></span></a> There is a certain ant whose destructive ravages are dreaded by the people of Nias. Generally they wage war on it by means of traps and other devices; but at the time of the rice-harvest they cease to call the insect by its common name, and refer to it under the title of Sibaia, a good spirit who is supposed to protect the crop from harm.<a href="#note_807" id="noteref_807" name="noteref_807"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">807</span></span></a> In South Mirzapur, when locusts threaten to eat up the fruits of the earth, the people catch one, decorate his head with a spot of red lead, salaam to him, and let him go. After these civilities he immediately departs along with his fellows.<a href="#note_808" id="noteref_808" name="noteref_808"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">808</span></span></a> Among the Wajagga of German East Africa sorcerers attempt to rid the fields of locusts by catching one of the insects, tying its legs together, and letting it fly away, after charging the creature to lead the swarm to the lands of a neighbouring and hostile chief.<a href="#note_809" id="noteref_809" name="noteref_809"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">809</span></span></a> The Wagogo, another tribe of German East Africa, catch one of the birds which infest their gardens, and, having drenched it with a charmed stuff, they release the bird in the hope that it may entice all its companions away into the forest.<a href="#note_810" id="noteref_810" name="noteref_810"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">810</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Sometimes in dealing with vermin the farmer aims at a judicious mean between undue severity and weak indulgence.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Sometimes in dealing with vermin the farmer aims at hitting a happy mean between excessive rigour on the one hand and weak indulgence on the other; kind but firm, he tempers severity with mercy. An ancient Greek treatise on farming advises the husbandman who would rid his lands of mice to act thus: <span class="tei tei-q">“Take a sheet of paper and write on it as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">‘I adjure you, ye mice here present, that ye neither injure me nor suffer another mouse to do so. I give you <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page277">[pg 277]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg277" name="Pg277"/> yonder field’</span> (here you specify the field); <span class="tei tei-q">‘but if ever I catch you here again, by the Mother of the Gods I will rend you in seven pieces.’</span> Write this, and stick the paper on an unhewn stone in the field before sunrise, taking care to keep the written side up.”</span><a href="#note_811" id="noteref_811" name="noteref_811"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">811</span></span></a> In the Ardennes they say that to get rid of rats you should repeat the following words: <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Erat verbum, apud Deum vestrum.</span></span> Male rats and female rats, I conjure you, by the great God, to go out of my house, out of all my habitations, and to betake yourselves to such and such a place, there to end your days. <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Decretis, reversis et desembarassis virgo potens, clemens, justitiae.</span></span>”</span> Then write the same words on pieces of paper, fold them up, and place one of them under the door by which the rats are to go forth, and the other on the road which they are to take. This exorcism should be performed at sunrise.<a href="#note_812" id="noteref_812" name="noteref_812"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">812</span></span></a> Some years ago an American farmer was reported to have written a civil letter to the rats, telling them that his crops were short, that he could not afford to keep them through the winter, that he had been very kind to them, and that for their own good he thought they had better leave him and go to some of his neighbours who had more grain. This document he pinned to a post in his barn for the rats to read.<a href="#note_813" id="noteref_813" name="noteref_813"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">813</span></span></a> The mouse is one of the most dreaded enemies of the rice-crop in Celebes. Many therefore are the prayers and incantations which prudent farmers resort to for the purpose of keeping the vermin from their fields. Thus, for example, a man will run round his field, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Pruner is your name. Creep not through my rice. Be blind and deaf. Creep not through my rice. If you must creep through rice, go and creep through other rice.”</span> The following formula is equally effective: <span class="tei tei-q">“Pruner is your real name. Mouse is your by-name. Down in the evening land is the stone on which you ought to sit; in the west, in Java, is your abode.”</span> Or again: <span class="tei tei-q">“O Longtail, Longtail, eat not my <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page278">[pg 278]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg278" name="Pg278"/> rice. It is the rice of a prince. It is the field of one who is revered.”</span><a href="#note_814" id="noteref_814" name="noteref_814"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">814</span></span></a> The Aino of Japan believe that God first created rats and mice at Erum kotan, which means <span class="tei tei-q">“rat place.”</span> Indeed, there are a great many rats and mice there even now, and the people of the village worship mice and offer them libations and sacred sticks whittled at the top into shavings. Grateful for these attentions, the mice spare the gardens and will not nibble at the roots and the fruits. But if the people omit to worship the mice, or if they are rash enough to speak evil of them, the creatures are angry and eat up the garden produce. The havoc which rats and mice now work in the gardens of the Aino every year is attributed to the modern neglect of the people to worship the vermin.<a href="#note_815" id="noteref_815" name="noteref_815"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">815</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Sometimes a few of the vermin are treated with high distinction, while the rest are pursued with relentless rigour. Mock lamentations of women for insects which destroy the crops.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Sometimes the desired object is supposed to be attained by treating with high distinction one or two chosen individuals of the obnoxious species, while the rest are pursued with relentless rigour. In the East Indian island of Bali, the mice which ravage the rice-fields are caught in great numbers, and burned in the same way that corpses are burned. But two of the captured mice are allowed to live, and receive a little packet of white linen. Then the people bow down before them, as before gods, and let them go.<a href="#note_816" id="noteref_816" name="noteref_816"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">816</span></span></a> In the Kangean archipelago, East Indies, when the mice prove very destructful to the rice-crop, the people rid themselves of the pest in the following manner. On a Friday, when the usual service in the mosque is over, four pairs of mice are solemnly united in marriage by the priest. Each pair is then shut up in a miniature canoe about a foot long. These canoes are filled with rice and other fruits of the earth, and the four pairs of mice are then escorted to the sea-shore just as if it were a real wedding. Wherever the procession passes the people beat with all their might on their rice-blocks. On reaching the shore, the canoes, with their little inmates, are launched and left to the mercy of the winds and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page279">[pg 279]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg279" name="Pg279"/> waves.<a href="#note_817" id="noteref_817" name="noteref_817"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">817</span></span></a> When the farms of the Sea Dyaks or Ibans of Sarawak are much pestered by birds and insects, they catch a specimen of each kind of vermin (one sparrow, one grasshopper and so on), put them in a tiny boat of bark well-stocked with provisions, and then allow the little vessel with its obnoxious passengers to float down the river. If that does not drive the pests away, the Dyaks resort to what they deem a more effectual mode of accomplishing the same purpose. They make a clay crocodile as large as life and set it up in the fields, where they offer it food, rice-spirit, and cloth, and sacrifice a fowl and a pig before it. Mollified by these attentions, the ferocious animal very soon gobbles up all the creatures that devour the crops.<a href="#note_818" id="noteref_818" name="noteref_818"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">818</span></span></a> In some parts of Bohemia the peasant, though he kills field mice and grey mice without scruple, always spares white mice. If he finds a white mouse he takes it up carefully, and makes a comfortable bed for it in the window; for if it died the luck of the house would be gone, and the grey mice would multiply fearfully in the dwelling.<a href="#note_819" id="noteref_819" name="noteref_819"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">819</span></span></a> In Albania, if the fields or vineyards are ravaged by locusts or beetles, some of the women will assemble with dishevelled hair, catch a few of the insects, and march with them in a funeral procession to a spring or stream, in which they drown the creatures. Then one of the women sings, <span class="tei tei-q">“O locusts and beetles who have left us bereaved,”</span> and the dirge is taken up and repeated by all the women in chorus. Thus by celebrating the obsequies of a few locusts and beetles, they hope to bring about the death of them all.<a href="#note_820" id="noteref_820" name="noteref_820"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">820</span></span></a> When caterpillars invaded a vineyard or field in Syria, the virgins were gathered, and one of the caterpillars was taken and a girl made its mother. Then they bewailed and buried it. Thereafter they conducted the <span class="tei tei-q">“mother”</span> to the place where the caterpillars were, consoling her, in order that all the caterpillars might leave the garden.<a href="#note_821" id="noteref_821" name="noteref_821"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">821</span></span></a> On the first of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page280">[pg 280]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg280" name="Pg280"/> September, Russian girls <span class="tei tei-q">“make small coffins of turnips and other vegetables, enclose flies and other insects in them, and then bury them with a great show of mourning.”</span><a href="#note_822" id="noteref_822" name="noteref_822"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">822</span></span></a> In South Africa a plague of caterpillars is removed by a number of small Caffre girls, who go singing through the fields. They wail as they pass through the languishing crops, and thus invoke the aid and pity of some ancestral spirits. The mournful rite ends with a dance on a plot of ground overlooking the fields.<a href="#note_823" id="noteref_823" name="noteref_823"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">823</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Ceremony performed by Baronga women to drive insects from the crops.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>On the shore of Delagoa Bay there thrives a small brown beetle which is very destructive to the beans and maize. The Baronga call it <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">noonoo</span></span>. In December or January, when the insects begin to swarm, women are sent to collect them from the bean-stalks in shells. When they have done so, a twin girl is charged with the duty of throwing the insects into a neighbouring lake. Accompanied by a woman of mature years and carrying the beetles in a calabash, the girl goes on her mission without saying a word to any one. At her back marches the whole troop of women, their arms, waists, and heads covered with grass and holding in their hands branches of manioc with large leaves which they wave to and fro, while they chant the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Noonoo</span></span>, go away! Leave our fields! <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Noonoo</span></span>, go away! leave our fields!”</span> The little girl throws her calabash with the beetles into the water without looking behind her, and thereupon the women bellow out obscene songs, which they never dare to utter except on this occasion and at the ceremony for making rain.<a href="#note_824" id="noteref_824" name="noteref_824"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">824</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Images made of vermin as a charm to get rid of them.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Another mode of getting rid of vermin and other noxious creatures without hurting their feelings or shewing them disrespect is to make images of them. Apollonius of Tyana is said to have cleared Antioch of scorpions by making a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page281">[pg 281]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg281" name="Pg281"/> bronze image of a scorpion and burying it under a small pillar in the middle of the city.<a href="#note_825" id="noteref_825" name="noteref_825"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">825</span></span></a> Further, it is reported that he freed Constantinople from flies by means of a bronze fly, and from gnats by means of a bronze gnat.<a href="#note_826" id="noteref_826" name="noteref_826"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">826</span></span></a> In the Middle Ages Virgil passed for an enchanter and is said to have rid Naples of flies and grasshoppers by bronze or copper images of these insects; and when the waters of the city were infested by leeches, he made a golden leech, which put a stop to the plague.<a href="#note_827" id="noteref_827" name="noteref_827"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">827</span></span></a> It is reported that a mosque at Fez used to be protected against scorpions by an image of a bird holding a scorpion in its beak.<a href="#note_828" id="noteref_828" name="noteref_828"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">828</span></span></a> An Arab writer tells of a golden locust which guarded a certain town from a plague of locusts; and he also mentions two brazen oxen which checked a murrain among cattle.<a href="#note_829" id="noteref_829" name="noteref_829"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">829</span></span></a> Gregory of Tours tells us that the city of Paris used to be free of dormice and serpents, but that in his lifetime, while they were cleaning a sewer, they found a bronze serpent and a bronze dormouse and removed them. <span class="tei tei-q">“Since then,”</span> adds the good bishop, <span class="tei tei-q">“dormice and serpents without number have been seen in Paris.”</span><a href="#note_830" id="noteref_830" name="noteref_830"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">830</span></span></a> When their land was overrun with mice, the Philistines made golden images of the vermin and sent them out of the country in a new cart drawn by two cows, hoping that the real mice would simultaneously depart.<a href="#note_831" id="noteref_831" name="noteref_831"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">831</span></span></a> So when a swarm of serpents afflicted the Israelites in the desert, they made a serpent of brass and set it on a pole as a mode of staying the plague.<a href="#note_832" id="noteref_832" name="noteref_832"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">832</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page282">[pg 282]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg282" name="Pg282"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc43" name="toc43"/>
					<a id="pdf44" name="pdf44"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. Mouse Apollo and Wolf Apollo.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Greek gods who took titles from vermin. Mouse (Smintheus) Apollo.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Some of the Greek gods were worshipped under titles derived from the vermin or other pests which they were supposed to avert or exterminate. Thus we hear of Mouse Apollo,<a href="#note_833" id="noteref_833" name="noteref_833"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">833</span></span></a> Locust Apollo,<a href="#note_834" id="noteref_834" name="noteref_834"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">834</span></span></a> and Mildew Apollo;<a href="#note_835" id="noteref_835" name="noteref_835"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">835</span></span></a> of Locust Hercules and Worm-killing Hercules;<a href="#note_836" id="noteref_836" name="noteref_836"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">836</span></span></a> of Foxy Dionysus;<a href="#note_837" id="noteref_837" name="noteref_837"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">837</span></span></a> and of Zeus the Fly-catcher or Averter of Flies.<a href="#note_838" id="noteref_838" name="noteref_838"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">838</span></span></a> If we could trace all these and similar worships to their origin, we should probably find that they were at first addressed, not to the high gods as the protectors of mankind, but to the baleful things themselves, the mice, locusts, mildew, and so forth, with the intention of flattering and soothing them, of disarming their malignity, and of persuading them to spare their worshippers. We know that the Romans worshipped the mildew, the farmer's plague, under its own proper name.<a href="#note_839" id="noteref_839" name="noteref_839"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">839</span></span></a> The ravages committed by mice among the crops both in ancient and modern times are notorious,<a href="#note_840" id="noteref_840" name="noteref_840"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">840</span></span></a> and according to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page283">[pg 283]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg283" name="Pg283"/> a tradition which may be substantially correct the worship of the Mouse (Smintheus) Apollo was instituted to avert them.<a href="#note_841" id="noteref_841" name="noteref_841"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">841</span></span></a> The image of a mouse which stood beside Apollo's tripod in the god's temple in the Troad,<a href="#note_842" id="noteref_842" name="noteref_842"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">842</span></span></a> may be compared with the golden mice which the Philistines made for the purpose of ridding themselves of the vermin; and the tame mice kept in his sanctuary, together with the white mice which lived under the altar,<a href="#note_843" id="noteref_843" name="noteref_843"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">843</span></span></a> would on this hypothesis be parallel to the white mice which the Bohemian peasant still cherishes as the best way of keeping down the numbers of their grey-coated brethren.<a href="#note_844" id="noteref_844" name="noteref_844"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">844</span></span></a> An Oriental counterpart of the Mouse Apollo is the ancient pillar or rude idol which the Chams of Indo-China call <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">yang-tikuh</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“god rat,”</span> and to which they offer sacrifices whenever rats infest their fields in excessive numbers.<a href="#note_845" id="noteref_845" name="noteref_845"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">845</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Wolfish Apollo.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Another epithet applied to Apollo which probably admits of a similar explanation is Wolfish.<a href="#note_846" id="noteref_846" name="noteref_846"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">846</span></span></a> Various legends set forth how the god received the title of Wolfish because he exterminated wolves;<a href="#note_847" id="noteref_847" name="noteref_847"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">847</span></span></a> indeed this function was definitely attributed to him by the epithet Wolf-slayer.<a href="#note_848" id="noteref_848" name="noteref_848"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">848</span></span></a> Arguing from the analogy of the preceding cases, we may suppose that at first the wolves themselves were propitiated by fair words and sacrifices to induce them to spare man and beast; and that at a later time, when the Greeks, or rather the enlightened portion of them, had outgrown this rude form of worship, they transferred the duty of keeping off the wolves to a beneficent deity who discharged the same useful office for other pests, such as mice, locusts, and mildew. A reminiscence of the direct propitiation of the fierce and dangerous beasts themselves is preserved in the legends told to explain the origin of the Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens and of the sanctuary of Wolfish Apollo at Sicyon. It is said that once, when Athens was infested by wolves, Apollo commanded sacrifices to be offered on the Place of Wolves and the smell <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page284">[pg 284]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg284" name="Pg284"/> proved fatal to the animals.<a href="#note_849" id="noteref_849" name="noteref_849"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">849</span></span></a> Similarly at Sicyon, when the flocks suffered heavily from the ravages of wolves, the same god directed the shepherds to set forth meat mixed with a certain bark, and the wolves devoured the tainted meat and perished.<a href="#note_850" id="noteref_850" name="noteref_850"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">850</span></span></a> These legends probably reflect in a distorted form an old custom of sacrificing to the wolves, in other words of feeding them to mollify their ferocity and win their favour. We know that such a custom prevailed among the Letts down to comparatively recent times. In the month of December, about Christmas time, they sacrificed a goat to the wolves, with strange idolatrous rites, at a cross-road, for the purpose of inducing the wolves to spare the flocks and herds. After offering the sacrifice they used to brag that no beast of theirs would fall a victim to the ravening maw of a wolf for all the rest of that year, no, not though the pack were to run right through the herd. Sacrifices of this sort are reported to have been secretly offered by the Letts as late as the seventeenth century;<a href="#note_851" id="noteref_851" name="noteref_851"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">851</span></span></a> and if we knew more of peasant life in ancient Greece we might find that on winter days, while Aristotle was expounding his philosophy in the Lyceum or Place of Wolves at Athens, the Attic peasant was still carrying forth, in the crisp frosty air, his offering to the wolves, which all night long had been howling round his sheepfold in a snowy glen of Parnes or Pentelicus.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page285">[pg 285]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg285" name="Pg285"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
