<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-3-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc45" name="toc45"/>
				<a id="pdf46" name="pdf46"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter IX. The Doctrine of Lunar Sympathy.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>In the preceding chapter some evidence was adduced of the sympathetic influence which the waxing or waning moon is popularly supposed to exert on growth, especially on the growth of vegetation. But the doctrine of lunar sympathy does not stop there; it is applied also to the affairs of man, and various customs and rules have been deduced from it which aim at the amelioration and even the indefinite extension of human life. To illustrate this application of the popular theory at length would be out of place here, but a few cases may be mentioned by way of specimen.</p>
				<p>The natural fact on which all the customs in question seem to rest is the apparent monthly increase and decrease of the moon. From this observation men have inferred that all things simultaneously wax or wane in sympathy with it.<a href="#note_371" id="noteref_371" name="noteref_371"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">371</span></span></a> Thus the Mentras or Mantras of the Malay Peninsula have a tradition that in the beginning men did not die but grew thin with the waning of the moon, and waxed fat as she neared the full.<a href="#note_372" id="noteref_372" name="noteref_372"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">372</span></span></a> Of the Scottish Highlanders we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“the moon in her increase, full growth, and in her wane are with them the emblems of a rising, flourishing, and declining fortune. At the last period of her revolution they carefully avoid to engage in any business of importance; but the first and middle they seize with avidity, presaging the most auspicious issue to their undertakings.”</span><a href="#note_373" id="noteref_373" name="noteref_373"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">373</span></span></a> Similarly in some parts of Germany it is commonly believed that whatever is undertaken when the moon is on the increase succeeds well, and that the full moon brings everything to perfection; whereas business undertaken in the wane of the moon is doomed to failure.<a href="#note_374" id="noteref_374" name="noteref_374"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">374</span></span></a> This German belief has come down, as we might have anticipated, from barbaric times; for Tacitus tells us that the Germans considered the new or the full moon the most auspicious time for business;<a href="#note_375" id="noteref_375" name="noteref_375"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">375</span></span></a> and Caesar informs us that the Germans despaired of victory if they joined battle before the new moon.<a href="#note_376" id="noteref_376" name="noteref_376"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">376</span></span></a> The Spartans seem to have been of the same opinion, for it was a rule with them never to march out to war except when the moon was full. The rule prevented them from sending troops in time to fight the Persians at Marathon,<a href="#note_377" id="noteref_377" name="noteref_377"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">377</span></span></a> and but for Athenian valour this paltry superstition might have turned the scale of battle and decided the destiny of Greece, if not of Europe, for centuries. The Athenians themselves paid dear for a similar scruple: an eclipse of the moon cost them the loss of a gallant fleet and army before Syracuse, and practically sealed the fate of Athens, for she never recovered from the blow.<a href="#note_378" id="noteref_378" name="noteref_378"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">378</span></span></a> So heavy is the sacrifice which superstition demands of its votaries. In this respect the Greeks were on a level with the negroes of the Sudan, among whom, if a march has been decided upon during the last quarter of the moon, the departure is always deferred until the first day of the new moon. No chief would dare to undertake an expedition and lead out his warriors before the appearance of the crescent. Merchants and private persons observe the same rule on their journeys.<a href="#note_379" id="noteref_379" name="noteref_379"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">379</span></span></a> In like manner the Mandingoes of Senegambia pay great attention to the changes of the moon, and think it very unlucky to begin a journey or any other work of consequence in the last quarter.<a href="#note_380" id="noteref_380" name="noteref_380"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">380</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It is especially the appearance of the new moon, with its promise of growth and increase, which is greeted with ceremonies intended to renew and invigorate, by means of sympathetic magic, the life of man. Observers, ignorant of savage superstition, have commonly misinterpreted such customs as worship or adoration paid to the moon. In point of fact the ceremonies of new moon are probably in many cases rather magical than religious. The Indians of the Ucayali River in Peru hail the appearance of the new moon with great joy. They make long speeches to her, accompanied with vehement gesticulations, imploring her protection and begging that she will be so good as to invigorate their bodies.<a href="#note_381" id="noteref_381" name="noteref_381"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">381</span></span></a> On the day when the new moon first appeared, it was a custom with the Indians of San Juan Capistrano, in California, to call together all the young men for the purpose of its celebration. <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Correr la luna!</span></span>”</span> shouted one of the old men, <span class="tei tei-q">“Come, my boys, the moon! the moon!”</span> Immediately the young men began to run about in a disorderly fashion as if they were distracted, while the old men danced in a circle, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“As the moon dieth, and cometh to life again, so we also having to die will again live.”</span><a href="#note_382" id="noteref_382" name="noteref_382"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">382</span></span></a> An old traveller tells us that at the appearance of every new moon the negroes of the Congo clapped their hands and cried out, sometimes falling on their knees, <span class="tei tei-q">“So may I renew my life as thou art renewed.”</span> But if the sky happened to be clouded, they did nothing, alleging that the planet had lost its virtue.<a href="#note_383" id="noteref_383" name="noteref_383"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">383</span></span></a> A somewhat similar custom prevails among the Ovambo of South-Western Africa. On the first moonlight night of the new moon, young and old, their bodies smeared with white earth, perhaps in imitation of the planet's silvery light, dance to the moon and address to it wishes which they feel sure will be granted.<a href="#note_384" id="noteref_384" name="noteref_384"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">384</span></span></a> We may conjecture that among these wishes is a prayer for a renewal of life. When a Masai sees the new moon he throws a twig or stone at it with his left hand, and says, <span class="tei tei-q">“Give me long life,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“Give me strength”</span>; and when a pregnant woman sees the new moon she milks some milk into a small gourd, which she covers with green grass. Then she pours the milk away in the direction of the moon and says, <span class="tei tei-q">“Moon, give me my child safely.”</span><a href="#note_385" id="noteref_385" name="noteref_385"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">385</span></span></a> Among the Wagogo of German East Africa, at sight of the new moon some people break a stick in pieces, spit on the pieces, and throw them towards the moon, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Let all illness go to the west, where the sun sets.”</span><a href="#note_386" id="noteref_386" name="noteref_386"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">386</span></span></a> Among the Boloki of the Upper Congo there is much shouting and gesticulation on the appearance of a new moon. Those who have enjoyed good health pray that it may be continued, and those who have been sick ascribe their illness to the coming of the luminary and beg her to take away bad health and give them good health instead.<a href="#note_387" id="noteref_387" name="noteref_387"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">387</span></span></a> The Esthonians think that all the misfortunes which might befall a man in the course of a month may be forestalled and shifted to the moon, if a man will only say to the new moon, <span class="tei tei-q">“Good morrow, new moon. I must grow young, you must grow old. My eyes must grow bright, yours must grow dark. I must grow light as a bird, you must grow heavy as iron.”</span><a href="#note_388" id="noteref_388" name="noteref_388"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">388</span></span></a> On the fifteenth day of the moon, that is, at the time when the luminary has begun to wane, the Coreans take round pieces of paper, either red or white, which represent the moon, and having fixed them perpendicularly on split sticks they place them on the tops of the houses. Then persons who have been forewarned by fortune-tellers of impending evil pray to the moon to remove it from them.<a href="#note_389" id="noteref_389" name="noteref_389"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">389</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In India people attempt to absorb the vital influence of the moon by drinking water in which the luminary is reflected. Thus the Mohammedans of Oude fill a silver basin with water and hold it so that the orb of the full moon is mirrored in it. The person to be benefited must look steadfastly at the moon in the basin, then shut his eyes and drink the water at one gulp. Doctors recommend the draught as a remedy for nervous disorders and palpitation of the heart. Somewhat similar customs prevail among the Hindoos of Northern India. At the full moon of the month of Kuar (September-October) people lay out food on the house-tops, and when it has absorbed the rays of the moon they distribute it among their relations, who are supposed to lengthen their life by eating of the food which has thus been saturated with moonshine. Patients are often made to look at the moon reflected in melted butter, oil, or milk as a cure for leprosy and the like diseases.<a href="#note_390" id="noteref_390" name="noteref_390"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">390</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Naturally enough the genial influence of moonshine is often supposed to be particularly beneficial to children; for will not the waxing moon help them to wax in strength and stature? Hence in the island of Kiriwina, one of the Trobriands Group to the east of New Guinea, a mother always lifts up or presents her child to the first full moon after its birth in order that it may grow fast and talk soon.<a href="#note_391" id="noteref_391" name="noteref_391"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">391</span></span></a> So among the Baganda of Central Africa it was customary for each mother to take her child out at the first new moon after its birth, and to point out the moon to the infant; this was thought to make the child grow healthy and strong.<a href="#note_392" id="noteref_392" name="noteref_392"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">392</span></span></a> Among the Thonga of South Africa the presentation of the baby to the moon does not take place until the mother has resumed her monthly periods, which usually happens in the third month after the birth. When the new moon appears, the mother takes a torch or a burning brand from the fire and goes to the ash-heap behind the hut. She is followed by the grandmother carrying the child. At the ash-heap the mother throws the burning stick towards the moon, while the grandmother tosses the baby into the air, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“This is your moon!”</span> The child squalls and rolls over on the ash-heap. Then the mother snatches up the infant and nurses it; so they go home.<a href="#note_393" id="noteref_393" name="noteref_393"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">393</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The Guarayos Indians, who inhabit the gloomy tropical forests of Eastern Bolivia, lift up their children in the air at new moon in order that they may grow.<a href="#note_394" id="noteref_394" name="noteref_394"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">394</span></span></a> Among the Apinagos Indians, on the Tocantins River in Brazil, the French traveller Castelnau witnessed a remarkable dance by moonlight. The Indians danced in two long ranks which faced each other, the women on one side, the men on the other. Between the two ranks of dancers blazed a great fire. The men were painted in brilliant colours, and for the most part wore white or red skull-caps made of maize-flour and resin. Their dancing was very monotonous and consisted of a jerky movement of the body, while the dancer advanced first one leg and then the other. This dance they accompanied with a melancholy song, striking the ground with their weapons. Opposite them the women, naked and unpainted, stood in a single rank, their bodies bent slightly forward, their knees pressed together, their arms swinging in measured time, now forward, now backward, so as to join hands. A remarkable figure in the dance was a personage painted scarlet all over, who held in his hand a rattle composed of a gourd full of pebbles. From time to time he leaped across the great fire which burned between the men and the women. Then he would run rapidly in front of the women, stopping now and then before one or other and performing a series of strange gambols, while he shook his rattle violently. Sometimes he would sink with one knee to the ground, and then suddenly throw himself backward. Altogether the agility and endurance which he displayed were remarkable. This dance lasted for hours. When a woman was tired out she withdrew, and her place was taken by another; but the same men danced the monotonous dance all night. Towards midnight the moon attained the zenith and flooded the scene with her bright rays. A change now took place in the dance. A long line of men and women advanced to the fire between the ranks of the dancers. Each of them held one end of a hammock in which lay a new-born infant, whose squalls could be heard. These babes were now to be presented by their parents to the moon. On reaching the end of the line each couple swung the hammock, accompanying the movement by a chant, which all the Indians sang in chorus. The song seemed to consist of three words, repeated over and over again. Soon a shrill voice was heard, and a hideous old hag, like a skeleton, appeared with her arms raised above her head. She went round and round the assembly several times, then disappeared in silence. While she was present, the scarlet dancer with the rattle bounded about more furiously than ever, stopping only for a moment while he passed in front of the line of women. His body was contracted and bent towards them, and described an undulatory movement like that of a worm writhing. He shook his rattle violently, as if he would fain kindle in the women the fire which burned in himself. Then rising abruptly he would resume his wild career. During this time the loud voice of an orator was heard from the village repeating a curious name without cessation. Then the speaker approached slowly, carrying on his back some gorgeous bunches of brilliant feathers and under his arm a stone axe. Behind him walked a young woman bearing an infant in a loose girdle at her waist; the child was wrapped in a mat, which protected it against the chill night air. The couple paced slowly for a minute or two, and then vanished without speaking a word. At the same moment the curious name which the orator had shouted was taken up by the whole assembly and repeated by them again and again. This scene in its turn lasted a long time, but ceased suddenly with the setting of the moon. The French traveller who witnessed it fell asleep, and when he awoke all was calm once more: there was nothing to recall the infernal dances of the night.<a href="#note_395" id="noteref_395" name="noteref_395"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">395</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In explanation of these dances Castelnau merely observes that the Apinagos, like many other South American Indians, pay a superstitious respect to the moon. We may suppose that the ceremonious presentation of the infants to the moon was intended to ensure their life and growth. The names solemnly chanted by the whole assembly were probably those which the parents publicly bestowed on their children. As to the scarlet dancer who leaped across the fire, we may conjecture that he personated the moon, and that his strange antics in front of the women were designed to impart to them the fertilizing virtue of the luminary, and perhaps to facilitate their delivery.</p>
				<p>Among the Baganda of Central Africa there is general rejoicing when the new moon appears, and no work is done for seven days. When the crescent is first visible at evening, mothers take out their babies and hold them at arms' length, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“I want my child to keep in health till the moon wanes.”</span> At the same time a ceremony is performed which may be intended to ensure the king's life and health throughout the ensuing month. It is a custom with the Baganda to preserve the king's navel-string with great care during his life. The precious object is called the <span class="tei tei-q">“Twin”</span> of the king, as if it were his double; and the ghost of the royal afterbirth is believed to be attached to it. Enclosed in a pot, which is wrapt in bark cloths, the navel-string is kept in a temple specially built for it near the king's enclosure, and a great minister of state acts as its guardian and priest. Every new moon, at evening, he carries it in state, wrapped in bark cloths, to the king, who takes it into his hands, examines it, and returns it to the minister. The keeper of the navel-string then goes back with it to the house and sets it in the doorway, where it remains all night. Next morning it is taken from its wrappings and again placed in the doorway until the evening, when it is once more swathed in bark cloths and restored to its usual place.<a href="#note_396" id="noteref_396" name="noteref_396"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">396</span></span></a> Apparently the navel-string is conceived as a vital portion, a sort of external soul, of the king; and the attentions bestowed on it at the new moon may be supposed to refresh and invigorate it, thereby refreshing and invigorating the king's life.</p>
				<p>The Armenians appear to think that the moon exercises a baleful influence on little children. To avert that influence a mother will show the moon to her child and say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thine uncle, thine uncle.”</span> For the same purpose the father and mother will mount to the roof of the house at new moon on a Wednesday or Friday. The father then puts the child on a shovel and gives it to the mother, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“If it is thine, take it to thee. But if it is mine, rear it and give it to me back.”</span> The mother then takes the child and the shovel, and returns them to the father in like manner.<a href="#note_397" id="noteref_397" name="noteref_397"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">397</span></span></a> A similar opinion as to the noxious influence of moonshine on children was apparently held by the ancient Greeks; for Greek nurses took great care never to show their infants to the moon.<a href="#note_398" id="noteref_398" name="noteref_398"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">398</span></span></a> Some Brazilian Indians in like manner guard babies against the moon, believing that it would make them ill. Immediately after delivery mothers will hide themselves and their infants in the thickest parts of the forest in order that the moonlight may not fall on them.<a href="#note_399" id="noteref_399" name="noteref_399"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">399</span></span></a> It would be easy to understand why the waning moon should be deemed injurious to children; they might be supposed to peak and pine with its dwindling light. Thus in Angus it is thought that if a child be weaned during the waning of the moon, it will decay all the time that the moon continues to wane.<a href="#note_400" id="noteref_400" name="noteref_400"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">400</span></span></a> But it is less easy to see why the same deleterious influence on children should be ascribed to moonlight in general.</p>
				<p>There are many other ways in which people have sought to turn lunar sympathy to practical account. Clearly the increase of the moon is the time to increase your goods, and the decrease of the moon is the time to diminish your ills. Acting on this imaginary law of nature many persons in Europe show their money to the new moon or turn it in their pockets at that season, in the belief that the money will grow with the growth of the planet; sometimes, by way of additional precaution, they spit on the coin at the same time.<a href="#note_401" id="noteref_401" name="noteref_401"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">401</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Both Christians and Moslems in Syria turn their silver money in their pockets at the new moon for luck; and two persons meeting under the new moon will each take out a silver coin and embrace, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">‘May you begin and end; and may it be a good month to us.’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_402" id="noteref_402" name="noteref_402"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">402</span></span></a> Conversely the waning of the moon is the most natural time to get rid of bodily ailments. In Brittany they think that warts vary with the phases of the moon, growing as it waxes and vanishing away as it wanes.<a href="#note_403" id="noteref_403" name="noteref_403"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">403</span></span></a> Accordingly, they say in Germany that if you would rid yourself of warts you should treat them when the moon is on the decrease.<a href="#note_404" id="noteref_404" name="noteref_404"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">404</span></span></a> And a German cure for toothache, earache, headache, and so forth, is to look towards the waning moon and say, <span class="tei tei-q">“As the moon decreases, so may my pains decrease also.”</span><a href="#note_405" id="noteref_405" name="noteref_405"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">405</span></span></a> However, some Germans reverse the rule. They say, for example, that if you are afflicted with a wen, you should face the waxing moon, lay your finger on the wen, and say thrice, <span class="tei tei-q">“What I see waxes; what I touch, let it vanish away.”</span> After each of these two sentences you should cross yourself thrice. Then go home without speaking to any one, and repeat three paternosters behind the kitchen door.<a href="#note_406" id="noteref_406" name="noteref_406"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">406</span></span></a> The Huzuls of the Carpathians recommend a somewhat similar, and no doubt equally efficacious, cure for waterbrash. They say that at new moon the patient should run thrice round the house and then say to the moon, <span class="tei tei-q">“Moon, moon, where wast thou?”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Behind the mountain.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“What hast thou eaten there?”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Horse flesh.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Why hast thou brought me nothing?”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Because I forgot.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“May the waterbrash forget to burn me!”</span><a href="#note_407" id="noteref_407" name="noteref_407"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">407</span></span></a> Thus a curative virtue appears to be attributed by some people to the waning and by others to the waxing moon. There is perhaps just as much, or as little, to be said for the one attribution as for the other.</p>
			</div>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
