<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter XII. The Golden Bough.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>Thus the view that Balder's life was in the mistletoe is entirely in harmony with primitive modes of thought. It may indeed sound like a contradiction that, if his life was in the mistletoe, he should nevertheless have been killed by a blow from the plant. But when a person's life is conceived as embodied in a particular object, with the existence of which his own existence is inseparably bound up, and the destruction of which involves his own, the object in question may be regarded and spoken of indifferently as his life or his death, as happens in the fairy tales. Hence if a man's death is in an object, it is perfectly natural that he should be killed by a blow from it. In the fairy tales Koshchei the Deathless is killed by a blow from the egg or the stone in which his life or death is secreted;<a href="#note_675" id="noteref_675" name="noteref_675"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">675</span></span></a> the ogres burst when a certain grain of sand—doubtless containing their life or death—is carried over their heads;<a href="#note_676" id="noteref_676" name="noteref_676"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">676</span></span></a> the magician dies when the stone in which his life or death is contained is put under his pillow;<a href="#note_677" id="noteref_677" name="noteref_677"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">677</span></span></a> and the Tartar hero is warned that he may be killed by the golden arrow or golden sword in which his soul has been stowed away.<a href="#note_678" id="noteref_678" name="noteref_678"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">678</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The idea that the life of the oak was in the mistletoe was probably suggested, as I have said, by the observation that in winter the mistletoe growing on the oak remains green while the oak itself is leafless. But the position of the plant—growing not from the ground but from the trunk or branches of the tree—might confirm this idea. Primitive man might think that, like himself, the oak-spirit had sought to deposit his life in some safe place, and for this purpose had pitched on the mistletoe, which, being in a sense neither on earth nor in heaven, might be supposed to be fairly out of harm's way. In the first chapter we saw that primitive man seeks to preserve the life of his human divinities by keeping them poised between earth and heaven, as the place where they are least likely to be assailed by the dangers that encompass the life of man on earth. We can therefore understand why it has been a rule both of ancient and of modern folk-medicine that the mistletoe should not be allowed to touch the ground; were it to touch the ground, its healing virtue would be gone.<a href="#note_679" id="noteref_679" name="noteref_679"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">679</span></span></a> This may be a survival of the old superstition that the plant in which the life of the sacred tree was concentrated should not be exposed to the risk incurred by contact with the earth. In an Indian legend, which offers a parallel to the Balder myth, Indra swore to the demon Namuci that he would slay him neither by day nor by night, neither with staff nor with bow, neither with the palm of the hand nor with the fist, neither with the wet nor with the dry. But he killed him in the morning twilight by sprinkling over him the foam of the sea.<a href="#note_680" id="noteref_680" name="noteref_680"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">680</span></span></a> The foam of the sea is just such an object as a savage might choose to put his life in, because it occupies that sort of intermediate or nondescript position between earth and sky or sea and sky in which primitive man sees safety. It is therefore not surprising that the foam of the river should be the totem of a clan in India.<a href="#note_681" id="noteref_681" name="noteref_681"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">681</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Again, the view that the mistletoe owes its mystic character partly to its not growing on the ground is confirmed by a parallel superstition about the mountain-ash or rowan-tree. In Jutland a rowan that is found growing out of the top of another tree is esteemed <span class="tei tei-q">“exceedingly effective against witchcraft: since it does not grow on the ground witches have no power over it; if it is to have its full effect it must be cut on Ascension Day.”</span><a href="#note_682" id="noteref_682" name="noteref_682"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">682</span></span></a> Hence it is placed over doors to prevent the ingress of witches.<a href="#note_683" id="noteref_683" name="noteref_683"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">683</span></span></a> In Sweden and Norway, also, magical properties are ascribed to a <span class="tei tei-q">“flying-rowan”</span> (<i>flögrönn</i>), that is to a rowan which is found growing not in the ordinary fashion on the ground but on another tree, or on a roof, or in a cleft of the rock, where it has sprouted from seed scattered by birds. They say that a man who is out in the dark should have a bit of <span class="tei tei-q">“flying-rowan”</span> with him to chew; else he runs a risk of being bewitched and of being unable to stir from the spot.<a href="#note_684" id="noteref_684" name="noteref_684"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">684</span></span></a> A Norwegian story relates how once on a time a Troll so bewitched some men who were ploughing in a field that they could not drive a straight furrow; only one of the ploughmen was able to resist the enchantment because by good luck his plough was made out of a <span class="tei tei-q">“flying-rowan.”</span><a href="#note_685" id="noteref_685" name="noteref_685"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">685</span></span></a> In Sweden, too, the <span class="tei tei-q">“flying-rowan”</span> is used to make the divining rod, which discovers hidden treasures. This useful art has nowadays unfortunately been almost forgotten, but three hundred years ago it was in full bloom, as we gather from the following contemporary account. <span class="tei tei-q">“If in the woods or elsewhere, on old walls or on high mountains or rocks you perceive a rowan-tree (<i xml:lang="sv">runn</i>) which has sprung from a seed that a bird has dropped from its bill, you must either knock or break off that rod or tree in the twilight between the third day and the night after Ladyday. But you must take care that neither iron nor steel touches it and that in carrying it home you do not let it fall on the ground. Then place it under the roof on a spot under which you have laid various metals, and you will soon be surprised to see how that rod under the roof gradually bends in the direction of the metals. When your rod has sat there in the same spot for fourteen days or more, you take a knife or an awl, which has been stroked with a magnet, and with it you slit the bark on all sides, and pour or drop the blood of a cock (best of all the blood from the comb of a cock which is all of one colour) on the said slits in the bark; and when the blood has dried, the rod is ready and will give public proof of the efficacy of its marvellous properties.”</span><a href="#note_686" id="noteref_686" name="noteref_686"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">686</span></span></a> Just as in Scandinavia the parasitic rowan is deemed a countercharm to sorcery, so in Germany the parasitic mistletoe is still commonly considered a protection against witchcraft, and in Sweden, as we saw, the mistletoe which is gathered on Midsummer Eve is attached to the ceiling of the house, the horse's stall or the cow's crib, in the belief that this renders the Troll powerless to injure man or beast.<a href="#note_687" id="noteref_687" name="noteref_687"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">687</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The view that the mistletoe was not merely the instrument of Balder's death, but that it contained his life, is countenanced by the analogy of a Scottish superstition. Tradition ran that the fate of the Hays of Errol, an estate in Perthshire, near the Firth of Tay, was bound up with the mistletoe that grew on a certain great oak. A member of the Hay family has recorded the old belief as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“Among the low country families the badges are now almost generally forgotten; but it appears by an ancient MS. and the tradition of a few old people in Perthshire, that the badge of the Hays was the mistletoe. There was formerly in the neighbourhood of Errol, and not far from the Falcon stone, a vast oak of an unknown age, and upon which grew a profusion of the plant: many charms and legends were considered to be connected with the tree, and the duration of the family of Hay was said to be united with its existence. It was believed that a sprig of the mistletoe cut by a Hay on Allhallowmas eve, with a new dirk, and after surrounding the tree three times sunwise, and pronouncing a certain spell, was a sure charm against all glamour or witchery, and an infallible guard in the day of battle. A spray gathered in the same manner was placed in the cradle of infants, and thought to defend them from being changed for elf-bairns by the fairies. Finally, it was affirmed, that when the root of the oak had perished, <span class="tei tei-q">‘the grass should grow in the hearth of Errol, and a raven should sit in the falcon's nest.’</span> The two most unlucky deeds which could be done by one of the name of Hay were, to kill a white falcon, and to cut down a limb from the oak of Errol. When the old tree was destroyed I could never learn. The estate has been some time sold out of the family of Hay, and of course it is said that the fatal oak was cut down a short time before.”</span><a href="#note_688" id="noteref_688" name="noteref_688"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">688</span></span></a> The old superstition is recorded in verses which are traditionally ascribed to Thomas the Rhymer:—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">While the mistletoe bats on Errol's aik,</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 1.80em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And that aik stands fast,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The Hays shall flourish, and their good grey hawk</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 1.80em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Shall nocht flinch before the blast.</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">But when the root of the aik decays,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 1.80em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And the mistletoe dwines on its withered breast,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The grass shall grow on Errol's hearthstane,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 1.80em">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And the corbie roup in the falcon's nest.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span><a href="#note_689" id="noteref_689" name="noteref_689">
								<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">689</span>
								</span>
							</a>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The idea that the fate of a family, as distinct from the lives of its members, is bound up with a particular plant or tree, is no doubt comparatively modern. The older view may have been that the lives of all the Hays were in this particular mistletoe, just as in the Indian story the lives of all the ogres are in a lemon; to break a twig of the mistletoe would then have been to kill one of the Hays. Similarly in the island of Rum, whose bold mountains the voyager from Oban to Skye observes to seaward, it was thought that if one of the family of Lachlin shot a deer on the mountain of Finchra, he would die suddenly or contract a distemper which would soon prove fatal.<a href="#note_690" id="noteref_690" name="noteref_690"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">690</span></span></a> Probably the life of the Lachlins was bound up with the deer on Finchra, as the life of the Hays was bound up with the mistletoe on Errol's oak, and the life of the Dalhousie family with the Edgewell Tree.</p>
				<p>It is not a new opinion that the Golden Bough was the mistletoe.<a href="#note_691" id="noteref_691" name="noteref_691"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">691</span></span></a> True, Virgil does not identify but only compares it with mistletoe. But this may be only a poetical device to cast a mystic glamour over the humble plant. Or, more probably, his description was based on a popular superstition that at certain times the mistletoe blazed out into a supernatural golden glory. The poet tells how two doves, guiding Aeneas to the gloomy vale in whose depth grew the Golden Bough, alighted upon a tree, <span class="tei tei-q">“whence shone a flickering gleam of gold. As in the woods in winter cold the mistletoe—a plant not native to its tree—is green with fresh leaves and twines its yellow berries about the boles; such seemed upon the shady holm-oak the leafy gold, so rustled in the gentle breeze the golden leaf.”</span><a href="#note_692" id="noteref_692" name="noteref_692"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">692</span></span></a> Here Virgil definitely describes the Golden Bough as growing on a holm-oak, and compares it with the mistletoe. The inference is almost inevitable that the Golden Bough was nothing but the mistletoe seen through the haze of poetry or of popular superstition.</p>
				<p>Now grounds have been shewn for believing that the priest of the Arician grove—the King of the Wood—personified the tree on which grew the Golden Bough.<a href="#note_693" id="noteref_693" name="noteref_693"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">693</span></span></a> Hence if that tree was the oak, the King of the Wood must have been a personification of the oak-spirit. It is, therefore, easy to understand why, before he could be slain, it was necessary to break the Golden Bough. As an oak-spirit, his life or death was in the mistletoe on the oak, and so long as the mistletoe remained intact, he, like Balder, could not die. To slay him, therefore, it was necessary to break the mistletoe, and probably, as in the case of Balder, to throw it at him. And to complete the parallel, it is only necessary to suppose that the King of the Wood was formerly burned, dead or alive, at the midsummer fire festival which, as we have seen, was annually celebrated in the Arician grove.<a href="#note_694" id="noteref_694" name="noteref_694"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">694</span></span></a> The perpetual fire which burned in the grove, like the perpetual fire which burned in the temple of Vesta at Rome and under the oak at Romove,<a href="#note_695" id="noteref_695" name="noteref_695"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">695</span></span></a> was probably fed with the sacred oak-wood; and thus it would be in a great fire of oak that the King of the Wood formerly met his end. At a later time, as I have suggested, his annual tenure of office was lengthened or shortened, as the case might be, by the rule which allowed him to live so long as he could prove his divine right by the strong hand. But he only escaped the fire to fall by the sword.</p>
				<p>Thus it seems that at a remote age in the heart of Italy, beside the sweet Lake of Nemi, the same fiery tragedy was annually enacted which Italian merchants and soldiers were afterwards to witness among their rude kindred, the Celts of Gaul, and which, if the Roman eagles had ever swooped on Norway, might have been found repeated with little difference among the barbarous Aryans of the North. The rite was probably an essential feature in the ancient Aryan worship of the oak.<a href="#note_696" id="noteref_696" name="noteref_696"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">696</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It only remains to ask, Why was the mistletoe called the Golden Bough?<a href="#note_697" id="noteref_697" name="noteref_697"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">697</span></span></a> The whitish-yellow of the mistletoe berries is hardly enough to account for the name, for Virgil says that the bough was altogether golden, stem as well as leaves.<a href="#note_698" id="noteref_698" name="noteref_698"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">698</span></span></a> Perhaps the name may be derived from the rich golden yellow which a bough of mistletoe assumes when it has been cut and kept for some months; the bright tint is not confined to the leaves, but spreads to the stalks as well, so that the whole branch appears to be indeed a Golden Bough. Breton peasants hang up great bunches of mistletoe in front of their cottages, and in the month of June these bunches are conspicuous for the bright golden tinge of their foliage.<a href="#note_699" id="noteref_699" name="noteref_699"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">699</span></span></a> In some parts of Brittany, especially about Morbihan, branches of mistletoe are hung over the doors of stables and byres to protect the horses and cattle,<a href="#note_700" id="noteref_700" name="noteref_700"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">700</span></span></a> probably against witchcraft.</p>
				<p>The yellow colour of the withered bough may partly explain why the mistletoe has been sometimes supposed to possess the property of disclosing treasures in the earth;<a href="#note_701" id="noteref_701" name="noteref_701"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">701</span></span></a> for on the principles of homoeopathic magic there is a natural affinity between a yellow bough and yellow gold. This suggestion is confirmed by the analogy of the marvellous properties popularly ascribed to the mythical fern-seed or fern-bloom. We saw that fern-seed is popularly supposed to bloom like gold or fire on Midsummer Eve.<a href="#note_702" id="noteref_702" name="noteref_702"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">702</span></span></a> Thus in Bohemia it is said that <span class="tei tei-q">“on St. John's Day fern-seed blooms with golden blossoms that gleam like fire.”</span><a href="#note_703" id="noteref_703" name="noteref_703"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">703</span></span></a> Now it is a property of this mythical fern-seed that whoever has it, or will ascend a mountain holding it in his hand on Midsummer Eve, will discover a vein of gold or will see the treasures of the earth shining with a bluish flame.<a href="#note_704" id="noteref_704" name="noteref_704"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">704</span></span></a> In Russia they say that if you succeed in catching the wondrous bloom of the fern at midnight on Midsummer Eve, you have only to throw it up into the air, and it will fall like a star on the very spot where a treasure lies hidden.<a href="#note_705" id="noteref_705" name="noteref_705"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">705</span></span></a> In Brittany treasure-seekers gather fern-seed at midnight on Midsummer Eve, and keep it till Palm Sunday of the following year; then they strew the seed on ground where they think a treasure is concealed.<a href="#note_706" id="noteref_706" name="noteref_706"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">706</span></span></a> Tyrolese peasants imagine that hidden treasures can be seen glowing like flame on Midsummer Eve, and that fern-seed, gathered at this mystic season, with the usual precautions, will help to bring the buried gold to the surface.<a href="#note_707" id="noteref_707" name="noteref_707"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">707</span></span></a> In the Swiss canton of Freiburg people used to watch beside a fern on St. John's night in the hope of winning a treasure, which the devil himself sometimes brought to them.<a href="#note_708" id="noteref_708" name="noteref_708"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">708</span></span></a> In Bohemia they say that he who procures the golden bloom of the fern at this season has thereby the key to all hidden treasures; and that if maidens will spread a cloth under the fast-fading bloom, red gold will drop into it.<a href="#note_709" id="noteref_709" name="noteref_709"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">709</span></span></a> And in the Tyrol and Bohemia if you place fern-seed among money, the money will never decrease, however much of it you spend.<a href="#note_710" id="noteref_710" name="noteref_710"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">710</span></span></a> Sometimes the fern-seed is supposed to bloom on Christmas night, and whoever catches it will become very rich.<a href="#note_711" id="noteref_711" name="noteref_711"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">711</span></span></a> In Styria they say that by gathering fern-seed on Christmas night you can force the devil to bring you a bag of money.<a href="#note_712" id="noteref_712" name="noteref_712"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">712</span></span></a> In Swabia likewise you can, by taking the proper precautions, compel Satan himself to fetch you a packet of fern-seed on Christmas night. But for four weeks previously, and during the whole of the Advent season, you must be very careful never to pray, never to go to church, and never to use holy water; you must busy yourself all day long with devilish thoughts, and cherish an ardent wish that the devil would help you to get money. Thus prepared you take your stand, between eleven and twelve on Christmas night, at the meeting of two roads, over both of which corpses have been carried to the churchyard. Here many people meet you, some of them dead and buried long ago, it may be your parents or grandparents, or old friends and acquaintances, and they stop and greet you, and ask, <span class="tei tei-q">“What are you doing here?”</span> And tiny little goblins hop and dance about and try to make you laugh. But if you smile or utter a single word, the devil will tear you to shreds and tatters on the spot. If, however, you stand glum and silent and solemn, there will come, after all the ghostly train has passed by, a man dressed as a hunter, and that is the devil. He will hand you a paper cornet full of fern-seed, which you must keep and carry about with you as long as you live. It will give you the power of doing as much work at your trade in a day as twenty or thirty ordinary men could do in the same time. So you will grow very rich. But few people have the courage to go through with the ordeal. The people of Rotenburg tell of a weaver of their town, who lived some two hundred and fifty years ago and performed prodigies of weaving by a simple application of fern-seed which he had been so fortunate as to obtain, no doubt from the devil, though that is not expressly alleged by tradition. Rich in the possession of this treasure, the lazy rascal worked only on Saturdays and spent all the rest of the week playing and drinking; yet in one day he wove far more cloth than any other skilled weaver who sat at his loom from morning to night every day of the week. Naturally he kept his own counsel, and nobody might ever have known how he did it, if it had not been for what, humanly speaking, you might call an accident, though for my part I cannot but regard it as the manifest finger of Providence. One day—it was the octave of a festival—the fellow had woven a web no less than a hundred ells long, and his mistress resolved to deliver it to her customer the same evening. So she put the cloth in a basket and away she trudged with it. Her way led her past a church, and as she passed the sacred edifice, she heard the tinkle of the holy bell which announced the elevation of the Host. Being a good woman she put her basket down, knelt beside it, and there, with the shadows gathering round her, committed herself to the care of God and his good angels and received, along with the kneeling congregation in the lighted church, the evening benediction, which kept her and them from all the perils and dangers of the night. Then rising refreshed she took up her basket. But what was her astonishment on looking into it to find the whole web reduced to a heap of yarn! The blessed words of the priest at the altar had undone the cursed spell of the Enemy of Mankind.<a href="#note_713" id="noteref_713" name="noteref_713"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">713</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Thus, on the principle of like by like, fern-seed is supposed to discover gold because it is itself golden; and for a similar reason it enriches its possessor with an unfailing supply of gold. But while the fern-seed is described as golden, it is equally described as glowing and fiery.<a href="#note_714" id="noteref_714" name="noteref_714"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">714</span></span></a> Hence, when we consider that two great days for gathering the fabulous seed are Midsummer Eve and Christmas—that is, the two solstices (for Christmas is nothing but an old heathen celebration of the winter solstice)—we are led to regard the fiery aspect of the fern-seed as primary, and its golden aspect as secondary and derivative. Fern-seed, in fact, would seem to be an emanation of the sun's fire at the two turning-points of its course, the summer and winter solstices. This view is confirmed by a German story in which a hunter is said to have procured fern-seed by shooting at the sun on Midsummer Day at noon; three drops of blood fell down, which he caught in a white cloth, and these blood-drops were the fern-seed.<a href="#note_715" id="noteref_715" name="noteref_715"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">715</span></span></a> Here the blood is clearly the blood of the sun, from which the fern-seed is thus directly derived. Thus it may be taken as probable that fern-seed is golden, because it is believed to be an emanation of the sun's golden fire.</p>
				<p>Now, like fern-seed, the mistletoe is gathered either at Midsummer or Christmas<a href="#note_716" id="noteref_716" name="noteref_716"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">716</span></span></a>—that is, at the summer and winter solstices—and, like fern-seed, it is supposed to possess the power of revealing treasures in the earth. On Midsummer Eve people in Sweden make divining-rods of mistletoe, or of four different kinds of wood one of which must be mistletoe. The treasure-seeker places the rod on the ground after sun-down, and when it rests directly over treasure, the rod begins to move as if it were alive.<a href="#note_717" id="noteref_717" name="noteref_717"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">717</span></span></a> Now, if the mistletoe discovers gold, it must be in its character of the Golden Bough; and if it is gathered at the solstices, must not the Golden Bough, like the golden fern-seed, be an emanation of the sun's fire? The question cannot be answered with a simple affirmative. We have seen that the old Aryans perhaps kindled the solstitial and other ceremonial fires in part as sun-charms, that is, with the intention of supplying the sun with fresh fire; and as these fires were usually made by the friction or combustion of oak-wood,<a href="#note_718" id="noteref_718" name="noteref_718"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">718</span></span></a> it may have appeared to the ancient Aryan that the sun was periodically recruited from the fire which resided in the sacred oak. In other words, the oak may have seemed to him the original storehouse or reservoir of the fire which was from time to time drawn out to feed the sun. But if the life of the oak was conceived to be in the mistletoe, the mistletoe must on that view have contained the seed or germ of the fire which was elicited by friction from the wood of the oak. Thus, instead of saying that the mistletoe was an emanation of the sun's fire, it might be more correct to say that the sun's fire was regarded as an emanation of the mistletoe. No wonder, then, that the mistletoe shone with a golden splendour, and was called the Golden Bough. Probably, however, like fern-seed, it was thought to assume its golden aspect only at those stated times, especially midsummer, when fire was drawn from the oak to light up the sun.<a href="#note_719" id="noteref_719" name="noteref_719"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">719</span></span></a> At Pulverbatch, in Shropshire, it was believed within living memory that the oak-tree blooms on Midsummer Eve and the blossom withers before daylight. A maiden who wishes to know her lot in marriage should spread a white cloth under the tree at night, and in the morning she will find a little dust, which is all that remains of the flower. She should place the pinch of dust under her pillow, and then her future husband will appear to her in her dreams.<a href="#note_720" id="noteref_720" name="noteref_720"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">720</span></span></a> This fleeting bloom of the oak, if I am right, was probably the mistletoe in its character of the Golden Bough. The conjecture is confirmed by the observation that in Wales a real sprig of mistletoe gathered on Midsummer Eve is similarly placed under the pillow to induce prophetic dreams;<a href="#note_721" id="noteref_721" name="noteref_721"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">721</span></span></a> and further the mode of catching the imaginary bloom of the oak in a white cloth is exactly that which was employed by the Druids to catch the real mistletoe when it dropped from the bough of the oak, severed by the golden sickle.<a href="#note_722" id="noteref_722" name="noteref_722"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">722</span></span></a> As Shropshire borders on Wales, the belief that the oak blooms on Midsummer Eve may be Welsh in its immediate origin, though probably the belief is a fragment of the primitive Aryan creed. In some parts of Italy, as we saw,<a href="#note_723" id="noteref_723" name="noteref_723"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">723</span></span></a> peasants still go out on Midsummer morning to search the oak-trees for the <span class="tei tei-q">“oil of St. John,”</span> which, like the mistletoe, heals all wounds, and is, perhaps, the mistletoe itself in its glorified aspect. Thus it is easy to understand how a title like the Golden Bough, so little descriptive of its usual appearance on the tree, should have been applied to the seemingly insignificant parasite. Further, we can perhaps see why in antiquity mistletoe was believed to possess the remarkable property of extinguishing fire,<a href="#note_724" id="noteref_724" name="noteref_724"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">724</span></span></a> and why in Sweden it is still kept in houses as a safeguard against conflagration.<a href="#note_725" id="noteref_725" name="noteref_725"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">725</span></span></a> Its fiery nature marks it out, on homoeopathic principles, as the best possible cure or preventive of injury by fire.</p>
				<p>These considerations may partially explain why Virgil makes Aeneas carry a glorified bough of mistletoe with him on his descent into the gloomy subterranean world. The poet describes how at the very gates of hell there stretched a vast and gloomy wood, and how the hero, following the flight of two doves that lured him on, wandered into the depths of the immemorial forest till he saw afar off through the shadows of the trees the flickering light of the Golden Bough illuminating the matted boughs overhead.<a href="#note_726" id="noteref_726" name="noteref_726"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">726</span></span></a> If the mistletoe, as a yellow withered bough in the sad autumn woods, was conceived to contain the seed of fire, what better companion could a forlorn wanderer in the nether shades take with him than a bough that would be a lamp to his feet as well as a rod and staff to his hands? Armed with it he might boldly confront the dreadful spectres that would cross his path on his adventurous journey. Hence when Aeneas, emerging from the forest, comes to the banks of Styx, winding slow with sluggish stream through the infernal marsh, and the surly ferryman refuses him passage in his boat, he has but to draw the Golden Bough from his bosom and hold it up, and straightway the blusterer quails at the sight and meekly receives the hero into his crazy bark, which sinks deep in the water under the unusual weight of the living man.<a href="#note_727" id="noteref_727" name="noteref_727"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">727</span></span></a> Even in recent times, as we have seen, mistletoe has been deemed a protection against witches and trolls,<a href="#note_728" id="noteref_728" name="noteref_728"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">728</span></span></a> and the ancients may well have credited it with the same magical virtue. And if the parasite can, as some of our peasants believe, open all locks,<a href="#note_729" id="noteref_729" name="noteref_729"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">729</span></span></a> why should it not have served as an <span class="tei tei-q">“open Sesame”</span> in the hands of Aeneas to unlock the gates of death? There is some reason to suppose that when Orpheus in like manner descended alive to hell to rescue the soul of his dead wife Eurydice from the shades, he carried with him a willow bough to serve as a passport on his journey to and from the land of the dead; for in the great frescoes representing the nether world, with which the master hand of Polygnotus adorned the walls of a loggia at Delphi, Orpheus was depicted sitting pensively under a willow, holding his lyre, now silent and useless, in his left hand, while with his right he grasped the drooping boughs of the tree.<a href="#note_730" id="noteref_730" name="noteref_730"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">730</span></span></a> If the willow in the picture had indeed the significance which an ingenious scholar has attributed to it,<a href="#note_731" id="noteref_731" name="noteref_731"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">731</span></span></a> the painter meant to represent the dead musician dreaming wistfully of the time when the willow had carried him safe back across the Stygian ferry to that bright world of love and music which he was now to see no more. Again, on an ancient sarcophagus, which exhibits in sculptured relief the parting of Adonis from Aphrodite, the hapless youth, reclining in the lap of his leman, holds a branch, which has been taken to signify that he, too, by the help of the mystic bough, might yet be brought back from the gates of death to life and love.<a href="#note_732" id="noteref_732" name="noteref_732"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">732</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Now, too, we can conjecture why Virbius at Nemi came to be confounded with the sun.<a href="#note_733" id="noteref_733" name="noteref_733"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">733</span></span></a> If Virbius was, as I have tried to shew, a tree-spirit, he must have been the spirit of the oak on which grew the Golden Bough; for tradition represented him as the first of the Kings of the Wood. As an oak-spirit he must have been supposed periodically to rekindle the sun's fire, and might therefore easily be confounded with the sun itself. Similarly we can explain why Balder, an oak-spirit, was described as <span class="tei tei-q">“so fair of face and so shining that a light went forth from him,”</span><a href="#note_734" id="noteref_734" name="noteref_734"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">734</span></span></a> and why he should have been so often taken to be the sun. And in general we may say that in primitive society, when the only known way of making fire is by the friction of wood, the savage must necessarily conceive of fire as a property stored away, like sap or juice, in trees, from which he has laboriously to extract it. The Senal Indians of California <span class="tei tei-q">“profess to believe that the whole world was once a globe of fire, whence that element passed up into the trees, and now comes out whenever two pieces of wood are rubbed together.”</span><a href="#note_735" id="noteref_735" name="noteref_735"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">735</span></span></a> Similarly the Maidu Indians of California hold that <span class="tei tei-q">“the earth was primarily a globe of molten matter, and from that the principle of fire ascended through the roots into the trunk and branches of trees, whence the Indians can extract it by means of their drill.”</span><a href="#note_736" id="noteref_736" name="noteref_736"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">736</span></span></a> In Namoluk, one of the Caroline Islands, they say that the art of making fire was taught men by the gods. Olofaet, the cunning master of flames, gave fire to the bird <i>mwi</i> and bade him carry it to earth in his bill. So the bird flew from tree to tree and stored away the slumbering force of the fire in the wood, from which men can elicit it by friction.<a href="#note_737" id="noteref_737" name="noteref_737"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">737</span></span></a> In the ancient Vedic hymns of India the fire-god Agni <span class="tei tei-q">“is spoken of as born in wood, as the embryo of plants, or as distributed in plants. He is also said to have entered into all plants or to strive after them. When he is called the embryo of trees or of trees as well as plants, there may be a side-glance at the fire produced in forests by the friction of the boughs of trees.”</span><a href="#note_738" id="noteref_738" name="noteref_738"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">738</span></span></a> In some Australian languages the words for wood and fire are said to be the same.<a href="#note_739" id="noteref_739" name="noteref_739"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">739</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A tree which has been struck by lightning is naturally regarded by the savage as charged with a double or triple portion of fire; for has he not seen the mighty flash enter into the trunk with his own eyes? Hence perhaps we may explain some of the many superstitious beliefs concerning trees that have been struck by lightning. Thus in the opinion of the Cherokee Indians <span class="tei tei-q">“mysterious properties attach to the wood of a tree which has been struck by lightning, especially when the tree itself still lives, and such wood enters largely into the secret compounds of the conjurers. An ordinary person of the laity will not touch it, for fear of having cracks come upon his hands and feet, nor is it burned for fuel, for fear that lye made from the ashes will cause consumption. In preparing ballplayers for the contest, the medicine-man sometimes burns splinters of it to coal, which he gives to the players to paint themselves with, in order that they may be able to strike their opponents with all the force of a thunderbolt. Bark or wood from a tree struck by lightning, but still green, is beaten up and put into the water in which seeds are soaked before planting, to insure a good crop, but, on the other hand, any lightning-struck wood thrown into the field will cause the crop to wither, and it is believed to have a bad effect even to go into the field immediately after having been near such a tree.”</span><a href="#note_740" id="noteref_740" name="noteref_740"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">740</span></span></a> Apparently the Cherokees imagine that when wood struck by lightning is soaked in water the fierce heat of the slumbering fire in its veins is tempered to a genial warmth, which promotes the growth of the crops; but that when the force of the fire has not been thus diluted it blasts the growing corn. When the Thompson Indians of British Columbia wished to set fire to the houses of their enemies, they shot at them arrows which were either made from a tree that had been struck by lightning or had splinters of such wood attached to them.<a href="#note_741" id="noteref_741" name="noteref_741"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">741</span></span></a> They seem to have thought that wood struck by lightning was so charged with fire that it would ignite whatever it struck, the mere concussion sufficing to explode it like gunpowder. Yet curiously enough these Indians supposed that if they burned the wood of trees that had been struck by lightning, the weather would immediately turn cold.<a href="#note_742" id="noteref_742" name="noteref_742"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">742</span></span></a> Perhaps they conceived such trees as reservoirs of heat, and imagined that by using them up they would exhaust the supply and thus lower the temperature of the atmosphere.<a href="#note_743" id="noteref_743" name="noteref_743"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">743</span></span></a> Wendish peasants of Saxony similarly refuse to burn in their stoves the wood of trees that have been struck by lightning; but the reason they give for their refusal is different. They say that with such fuel the house would be burnt down.<a href="#note_744" id="noteref_744" name="noteref_744"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">744</span></span></a> No doubt they think that the electric flash, inherent in the wood, would send such a roaring flame up the chimney that nothing could stand before it. In like manner the Thonga of South Africa will not use such wood as fuel nor warm themselves at a fire which has been kindled with it; but what danger they apprehend from the wood we are not told.<a href="#note_745" id="noteref_745" name="noteref_745"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">745</span></span></a> On the contrary, when lightning sets fire to a tree, the Winamwanga of Northern Rhodesia put out all the fires in the village and plaster the fireplaces afresh, while the head men convey the lightning-kindled fire to the chief, who prays over it. The chief then sends out the new fire to all his villages, and the villagers reward his messengers for the boon. This shews that they look upon fire kindled by lightning with reverence, and the reverence is intelligible, for they speak of thunder and lightning as God himself coming down to earth.<a href="#note_746" id="noteref_746" name="noteref_746"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">746</span></span></a> Similarly the Maidu Indians of California believe that a Great Man created the world and all its inhabitants, and that lightning is nothing but the Great Man himself descending swiftly out of heaven and rending the trees with his flaming arm.<a href="#note_747" id="noteref_747" name="noteref_747"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">747</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It is a plausible theory that the reverence which the ancient peoples of Europe paid to the oak, and the connexion which they traced between the tree and their sky-god,<a href="#note_748" id="noteref_748" name="noteref_748"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">748</span></span></a> were derived from the much greater frequency with which the oak appears to be struck by lightning than any other tree of our European forests. Some remarkable statistics have been adduced in support of this view by Mr. W. Warde Fowler.<a href="#note_749" id="noteref_749" name="noteref_749"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">749</span></span></a> Observations, annually made in the forests of Lippe-Detmold for seventeen years, yielded the result that while the woods were mainly stocked with beech and only to a small extent with oak and Scotch pine, yet far more oaks and Scotch pines were struck by lightning than beeches, the number of stricken Scotch pines exceeding the number of stricken beeches in the proportion of thirty-seven to one, and the number of stricken oaks exceeding the number of stricken beeches in the proportion of no less than sixty to one. Similar results have been obtained from observations made in French and Bavarian forests.<a href="#note_750" id="noteref_750" name="noteref_750"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">750</span></span></a> In short, it would seem from statistics compiled by scientific observers, who have no mythological theories to maintain, that the oak suffers from the stroke of lightning far oftener than any other forest tree in Europe. However we may explain it, whether by the easier passage of electricity through oakwood than through any other timber,<a href="#note_751" id="noteref_751" name="noteref_751"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">751</span></span></a> or in some other way, the fact itself may well have attracted the notice of our rude forefathers, who dwelt in the vast forests which then covered a large part of Europe; and they might naturally account for it in their simple religious way by supposing that the great sky-god, whom they worshipped and whose awful voice they heard in the roll of thunder, loved the oak above all the trees of the wood and often descended into it from the murky cloud in a flash of lightning, leaving a token of his presence or of his passage in the riven and blackened trunk and the blasted foliage. Such trees would thenceforth be encircled by a nimbus of glory as the visible seats of the thundering sky-god. Certain it is that, like some savages, both Greeks and Romans identified their great god of the sky and of the oak with the lightning flash which struck the ground; and they regularly enclosed such a stricken spot and treated it thereafter as sacred.<a href="#note_752" id="noteref_752" name="noteref_752"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">752</span></span></a> It is not rash to suppose that the ancestors of the Celts and Germans in the forests of Central Europe paid a like respect for like reasons to a blasted oak.</p>
				<p>This explanation of the Aryan reverence for the oak and of the association of the tree with the great god of the thunder and the sky, was suggested or implied long ago by Jacob Grimm,<a href="#note_753" id="noteref_753" name="noteref_753"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">753</span></span></a> and has been of late powerfully reinforced by Mr. W. Warde Fowler.<a href="#note_754" id="noteref_754" name="noteref_754"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">754</span></span></a> It appears to be simpler and more probable than the explanation which I formerly adopted, namely, that the oak was worshipped primarily for the many benefits which our rude forefathers derived from the tree, particularly for the fire which they drew by friction from its wood; and that the connexion of the oak with the sky was an after-thought based on the belief that the flash of lightning was nothing but the spark which the sky-god up aloft elicited by rubbing two pieces of oak wood against each other, just as his savage worshipper kindled fire in the forest on earth.<a href="#note_755" id="noteref_755" name="noteref_755"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">755</span></span></a> On that theory the god of the thunder and the sky was derived from the original god of the oak; on the present theory, which I now prefer, the god of the sky and the thunder was the great original deity of our Aryan ancestors, and his association with the oak was merely an inference based on the frequency with which the oak was seen to be struck by lightning. If the Aryans, as some think, roamed the wide steppes of Russia or Central Asia with their flocks and herds before they plunged into the gloom of the European forests, they may have worshipped the god of the blue or cloudy firmament and the flashing thunderbolt long before they thought of associating him with the blasted oaks in their new home.<a href="#note_756" id="noteref_756" name="noteref_756"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">756</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Perhaps the new theory has the further advantage of throwing light on the special sanctity ascribed to mistletoe which grows on an oak. The mere rarity of such a growth on an oak hardly suffices to explain the extent and the persistence of the superstition. A hint of its real origin is possibly furnished by the statement of Pliny that the Druids worshipped the plant because they believed it to have fallen from heaven and to be a token that the tree on which it grew was chosen by the god himself.<a href="#note_757" id="noteref_757" name="noteref_757"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">757</span></span></a> Can they have thought that the mistletoe dropped on the oak in a flash of lightning? The conjecture is confirmed by the name thunder-besom which is applied to mistletoe in the Swiss canton of Aargau,<a href="#note_758" id="noteref_758" name="noteref_758"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">758</span></span></a> for the epithet clearly implies a close connexion between the parasite and the thunder; indeed <span class="tei tei-q">“thunder-besom”</span> is a popular name in Germany for any bushy nest-like excrescence growing on a branch, because such a parasitic growth is actually believed by the ignorant to be a product of lightning.<a href="#note_759" id="noteref_759" name="noteref_759"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">759</span></span></a> If there is any truth in this conjecture, the real reason why the Druids worshipped a mistletoe-bearing oak above all other trees of the forest was a belief that every such oak had not only been struck by lightning but bore among its branches a visible emanation of the celestial fire; so that in cutting the mistletoe with mystic rites they were securing for themselves all the magical properties of a thunderbolt. If that was so, we must apparently conclude that the mistletoe was deemed an emanation of the lightning rather than, as I have thus far argued, of the midsummer sun. Perhaps, indeed, we might combine the two seemingly divergent views by supposing that in the old Aryan creed the mistletoe descended from the sun on Midsummer Day in a flash of lightning. But such a combination is artificial and unsupported, so far as I know, by any positive evidence. Whether on mythical principles the two interpretations can really be reconciled with each other or not, I will not presume to say; but even should they prove to be discrepant, the inconsistency need not have prevented our rude forefathers from embracing both of them at the same time with an equal fervour of conviction; for like the great majority of mankind the savage is above being hidebound by the trammels of a pedantic logic. In attempting to track his devious thought through the jungle of crass ignorance and blind fear, we must always remember that we are treading enchanted ground, and must beware of taking for solid realities the cloudy shapes that cross our path or hover and gibber at us through the gloom. We can never completely replace ourselves at the standpoint of primitive man, see things with his eyes, and feel our hearts beat with the emotions that stirred his. All our theories concerning him and his ways must therefore fall far short of certainty; the utmost we can aspire to in such matters is a reasonable degree of probability.</p>
				<p>To conclude these enquiries we may say that if Balder was indeed, as I have conjectured, a personification of a mistletoe-bearing oak, his death by a blow of the mistletoe might on the new theory be explained as a death by a stroke of lightning. So long as the mistletoe, in which the flame of the lightning smouldered, was suffered to remain among the boughs, so long no harm could befall the good and kindly god of the oak, who kept his life stowed away for safety between earth and heaven in the mysterious parasite; but when once that seat of his life, or of his death, was torn from the branch and hurled at the trunk, the tree fell—the god died—smitten by a thunderbolt.<a href="#note_760" id="noteref_760" name="noteref_760"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">760</span></span></a></p>
				<p>And what we have said of Balder in the oak forests of Scandinavia may perhaps, with all due diffidence in a question so obscure and uncertain, be applied to the priest of Diana, the King of the Wood, at Aricia in the oak forests of Italy. He may have personated in flesh and blood the great Italian god of the sky, Jupiter,<a href="#note_761" id="noteref_761" name="noteref_761"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">761</span></span></a> who had kindly come down from heaven in the lightning flash to dwell among men in the mistletoe—the thunder-besom—the Golden Bough—growing on the sacred oak beside the still waters of the lake of Nemi. If that was so, we need not wonder that the priest guarded with drawn sword the mystic bough which contained the god's life and his own. The goddess whom he served and married was herself, if I am right, no other than the Queen of Heaven, the true wife of the sky-god. For she, too, loved the solitude of the woods and the lonely hills, and sailing overhead on clear nights in the likeness of the silver moon she looked down with pleasure on her own fair image reflected on the calm, the burnished surface of the lake, Diana's Mirror.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
