<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc35" name="toc35"/>
				<a id="pdf36" name="pdf36"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter VI. Human Scapegoats in Classical Antiquity.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc37" name="toc37"/>
					<a id="pdf38" name="pdf38"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Rome.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>We are now prepared to notice the use of the human scapegoat in classical antiquity. Every year on the fourteenth of March a man clad in skins was led in procession through the streets of Rome, beaten with long white rods, and driven out of the city. He was called Mamurius Veturius,<a href="#note_546" id="noteref_546" name="noteref_546"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">546</span></span></a> that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“the old Mars,”</span><a href="#note_547" id="noteref_547" name="noteref_547"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">547</span></span></a> and as the ceremony took place on the day preceding the first full moon of the old Roman year (which began on the first of March), the skin-clad man must have represented the Mars of the past year, who was driven out at the beginning of a new one. Now Mars was originally not a god of war but of vegetation. For it was to Mars that the Roman husbandman prayed for the prosperity of his corn and his vines, his fruit-trees and his copses;<a href="#note_548" id="noteref_548" name="noteref_548"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">548</span></span></a> it was to Mars that the priestly college of the Arval Brothers, whose business it was to sacrifice for the growth of the crops,<a href="#note_549" id="noteref_549" name="noteref_549"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">549</span></span></a> addressed their petitions almost exclusively;<a href="#note_550" id="noteref_550" name="noteref_550"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">550</span></span></a> and it was to Mars, as we saw,<a href="#note_551" id="noteref_551" name="noteref_551"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">551</span></span></a> that a horse was sacrificed in October to secure an abundant harvest. Moreover, it was to Mars, under his title of <span class="tei tei-q">“Mars of the woods”</span> (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Mars Silvanus</span></span>), that farmers offered sacrifice for the welfare of their cattle.<a href="#note_552" id="noteref_552" name="noteref_552"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">552</span></span></a> We have already seen that cattle are commonly supposed to be under the special patronage of tree-gods.<a href="#note_553" id="noteref_553" name="noteref_553"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">553</span></span></a> Once more, the consecration of the vernal month of March to Mars seems to point him out as the deity of the sprouting vegetation. Thus the Roman custom of expelling the old Mars at the beginning of the new year in spring is identical with the Slavonic custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“carrying out Death,”</span> if the view here taken of the latter custom is correct. The similarity of the Roman and Slavonic customs has been already remarked by scholars, who appear, however, to have taken Mamurius Veturius and the corresponding figures in the Slavonic ceremonies to be representatives of the old year rather than of the old god of vegetation.<a href="#note_554" id="noteref_554" name="noteref_554"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">554</span></span></a> It is possible that ceremonies of this kind may have come to be thus interpreted in later times even by the people who practised them. But the personification of a period of time is too abstract an idea to be primitive.<a href="#note_555" id="noteref_555" name="noteref_555"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">555</span></span></a> However, in the Roman, as in the Slavonic, ceremony, the representative of the god appears to have been treated not only as a deity of vegetation but also as a scapegoat. His expulsion implies this; for there is no reason why the god of vegetation, as such, should be expelled the city. But it is otherwise if he is also a scapegoat; it then becomes necessary to drive him beyond the boundaries, that he may carry his sorrowful burden away to other lands. And, in fact, Mamurius Veturius appears to have been driven away to the land of the Oscans, the enemies of Rome.<a href="#note_556" id="noteref_556" name="noteref_556"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">556</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The blows with which the <span class="tei tei-q">“old Mars”</span> was expelled the city seem to have been administered by the dancing priests of Mars, the Salii. At least we know that in their songs these priests made mention of Mamurius Veturius;<a href="#note_557" id="noteref_557" name="noteref_557"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">557</span></span></a> and we are told that on a day dedicated to him they beat a hide with rods.<a href="#note_558" id="noteref_558" name="noteref_558"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">558</span></span></a> It is therefore highly probable that the hide which they drubbed on that day was the one worn by the representative of the deity whose name they simultaneously chanted. Thus on the fourteenth day of March every year Rome witnessed the curious spectacle of the human incarnation of a god chased by the god's own priests with blows from the city. The rite becomes at least intelligible on the theory that the man so beaten and expelled stood for the outworn deity of vegetation, who had to be replaced by a fresh and vigorous young divinity at the beginning of a New Year, when everywhere around in field and meadow, in wood and thicket the vernal flowers, the sprouting grass, and the opening buds and blossoms testified to the stirring of new life in nature after the long torpor and stagnation of winter. The dancing priests of the god derived their name of Salii from the leaps or dances which they were bound to execute as a solemn religious ceremony every year in the Comitium, the centre of Roman political life.<a href="#note_559" id="noteref_559" name="noteref_559"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">559</span></span></a> Twice a year, in the spring month of March and the autumn month of October, they discharged this sacred duty;<a href="#note_560" id="noteref_560" name="noteref_560"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">560</span></span></a> and as they did so they invoked Saturn, the Roman god of sowing.<a href="#note_561" id="noteref_561" name="noteref_561"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">561</span></span></a> As the Romans sowed the corn both in spring and autumn,<a href="#note_562" id="noteref_562" name="noteref_562"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">562</span></span></a> and as down to the present time in Europe superstitious rustics are wont to dance and leap high in spring for the purpose of making the crops grow high,<a href="#note_563" id="noteref_563" name="noteref_563"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">563</span></span></a> we may conjecture that the leaps and dances performed by the Salii, the priests of the old Italian god of vegetation, were similarly supposed to quicken the growth of the corn by homoeopathic or imitative magic. The Salii were not limited to Rome; similar colleges of dancing priests are known to have existed in many towns of ancient Italy;<a href="#note_564" id="noteref_564" name="noteref_564"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">564</span></span></a> everywhere, we may conjecture, they were supposed to contribute to the fertility of the earth by their leaps and dances. At Rome they were divided into two colleges, each composed of twelve members; and it is not impossible that the number twelve was fixed with reference to the twelve months of the old lunar year;<a href="#note_565" id="noteref_565" name="noteref_565"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">565</span></span></a> the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fratres Arvales</span></span>, or <span class="tei tei-q">“Brethren of the Ploughed Fields,”</span> another Roman college of priests, whose functions were purely agricultural, and who wore as a badge of their office a wreath of corn-ears, were also twelve in number, perhaps for a similar reason.<a href="#note_566" id="noteref_566" name="noteref_566"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">566</span></span></a> Nor was the martial equipment of the Salii so alien to this peaceful function as a modern reader might naturally suppose. Each of them wore on his head a peaked helmet of bronze, and at his side a sword; on his left arm he carried a shield of a peculiar shape, and in his right hand he wielded a staff with which he smote on the shield till it rang again.<a href="#note_567" id="noteref_567" name="noteref_567"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">567</span></span></a> Such weapons in priestly hands may be turned against spiritual foes; in the preceding pages we have met with many examples of the use of material arms to rout the host of demons who oppress the imagination of primitive man, and we have seen that the clash and clangour of metal is often deemed particularly effective in putting these baleful beings to flight.<a href="#note_568" id="noteref_568" name="noteref_568"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">568</span></span></a> May it not have been so with the martial priests of Mars? We know that they paraded the city for days together in a regular order, taking up their quarters for the night at a different place each day; and as they went they danced in triple time, singing and clashing on their shields and taking their time from a fugleman, who skipped and postured at their head.<a href="#note_569" id="noteref_569" name="noteref_569"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">569</span></span></a> We may conjecture that in so doing they were supposed to be expelling the powers of evil which had accumulated during the preceding year or six months, and which the people pictured to themselves in the form of demons lurking in the houses, temples, and the other edifices of the city. In savage communities such tumultuous and noisy processions often parade the village for a similar purpose. Similarly, we have seen that among the Iroquois men in fantastic costume used to go about collecting the sins of the people as a preliminary to transferring them to the scapegoat dogs; and we have met with many examples of armed men rushing about the streets and houses to drive out demons and evils of all kinds.<a href="#note_570" id="noteref_570" name="noteref_570"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">570</span></span></a> Why should it not have been so also in ancient Rome? The religion of the old Romans is full of relics of savagery.</p>
					<p>If there is any truth in this conjecture, we may suppose that, as priests of a god who manifested his power in the vegetation of spring, the Salii turned their attention above all to the demons of blight and infertility, who might be thought by their maleficent activity to counteract the genial influence of the kindly god and to endanger the farmer's prospects in the coming summer or winter. The conjecture may be supported by analogies drawn from the customs of modern European peasants as well as of savages. Thus, to begin with savages, we have seen that at the time of sowing the Khonds drive out the <span class="tei tei-q">“evil spirits, spoilers of the seed”</span> from every house in the village, the expulsion being effected by young men who beat each other and strike the air violently with long sticks.<a href="#note_571" id="noteref_571" name="noteref_571"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">571</span></span></a> If I am right in connecting the vernal and the autumnal processions of the Salii with the vernal and the autumnal sowing, the analogy between the Khond and the Roman customs would be very close. In West Africa the fields of the King of Whydah, according to an old French traveller, <span class="tei tei-q">“are hoed and sowed before any of his subjects has leave to hoe and sow a foot of his own lands. These labours are performed thrice a year. The chiefs lead their people before the king's palace at daybreak, and there they sing and dance for a full quarter of an hour. Half of these people are armed as in a day of battle, the other half have only their farm tools. They go all together singing and dancing to the scene of their labours, and there, keeping time to the sound of the instruments, they work with such speed and neatness that it is a pleasure to behold. At the end of the day they return and dance before the king's palace. This exercise refreshes them and does them more good than all the repose they could take.”</span><a href="#note_572" id="noteref_572" name="noteref_572"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">572</span></span></a> From this account we might infer that the dancing was merely a recreation of the field-labourers, and that the music of the band had no other object than to animate them in their work by enabling them to ply their mattocks in time to its stirring strains. But this inference, though it seems to have been drawn by the traveller who has furnished the account, would probably be erroneous. For if half of the men were armed as for war, what were they doing in the fields all the time that the others were digging? A clue to unravel the mystery is furnished by the description which a later French traveller gives of a similar scene witnessed by him near Timbo in French Guinea. He saw some natives at work preparing the ground for sowing. <span class="tei tei-q">“It is a very curious spectacle: fifty or sixty blacks in a line, with bent backs, are smiting the earth simultaneously with their little iron tools, which gleam in the sun. Ten paces in front of them, marching backwards, the women sing a well marked air, clapping their hands as for a dance, and the hoes keep time to the song. Between the workers and the singers a man runs and dances, crouching on his hams like a clown, while he whirls about his musket and performs other manœuvres with it. Two others dance, also pirouetting and smiting the earth here and there with their little hoe. All that is necessary for exorcising the spirits and causing the grain to sprout.”</span><a href="#note_573" id="noteref_573" name="noteref_573"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">573</span></span></a> Here, while the song of the women gives the time to the strokes of the hoes, the dances and other antics of the armed man and his colleagues are intended to exorcise or ward off the spirits who might interfere with the diggers and so prevent the grain from sprouting.</p>
					<p>Again, an old traveller in southern India tells us that <span class="tei tei-q">“the men of Calicut, when they wish to sow rice, observe this practice. First, they plough the land with oxen as we do, and when they sow the rice in the field they have all the instruments of the city continually sounding and making merry. They also have ten or twelve men clothed like devils, and these unite in making great rejoicing with the players on the instruments, in order that the devil may make that rice very productive.”</span><a href="#note_574" id="noteref_574" name="noteref_574"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">574</span></span></a> We may suspect that the noisy music is played and the mummers cut their capers for the purpose rather of repelling demons than of inducing them to favour the growth of the rice. However, where our information is so scanty it would be rash to dogmatize. Perhaps the old traveller was right in thinking that the mummers personated devils. Among the Kayans of Central Borneo men disguised in wooden masks and great masses of green foliage certainly play the part of demons for the purpose of promoting the growth of the rice just before the seed is committed to the ground; and it is notable that among the performances which they give on this occasion are war dances.<a href="#note_575" id="noteref_575" name="noteref_575"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">575</span></span></a> Again, among the Kaua and Kobeua Indians of North-Western Brazil masked men who represent spirits or demons of fertility perform dances or rather pantomimes for the purpose of stimulating the growth of plants, quickening the wombs of women, and promoting the multiplication of animals.<a href="#note_576" id="noteref_576" name="noteref_576"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">576</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Further, we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“the natives of Aracan dance in order to render propitious the spirits whom they believe to preside over the sowing and over the harvest. There are definite times for doing it, and we may say that in their eyes it is, as it were, an act of religion.”</span><a href="#note_577" id="noteref_577" name="noteref_577"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">577</span></span></a> Another people who dance diligently to obtain good crops are the Tarahumare Indians of Mexico. They subsist by agriculture and their thoughts accordingly turn much on the supply of rain, which is needed for their fields. According to them, <span class="tei tei-q">“the favour of the gods may be won by what for want of a better term may be called dancing, but what in reality is a series of monotonous movements, a kind of rhythmical exercise, kept up sometimes for two nights. By dint of such hard work they think to prevail upon the gods to grant their prayers. The dancing is accompanied by the song of the shaman, in which he communicates his wishes to the unseen world, describing the beautiful effect of the rain, the fog, and the mist on the vegetable world. He invokes the aid of all the animals, mentioning each by name, and also calls on them, especially the deer and the rabbit, to multiply that the people may have plenty to eat. As a matter of fact, the Tarahumares assert that the dances have been taught them by the animals. Like all primitive people, they are close observers of nature. To them the animals are by no means inferior creatures; they understand magic and are possessed of much knowledge, and may assist the Tarahumares in making rain. In spring, the singing of the birds, the cooing of the dove, the croaking of the frog, the chirping of the cricket, all the sounds uttered by the denizens of the greensward, are to the Indian appeals to the deities for rain. For what other reason should they sing or call? For the strange behaviour of many animals in the early spring the Tarahumares can find no other explanation but that these creatures, too, are interested in rain. And as the gods grant the prayers of the deer expressed in its antics and dances, and of the turkey in its curious playing, by sending the rain, they easily infer that to please the gods they, too, must dance as the deer and play as the turkey. From this it will be understood that dance with these people is a very serious and ceremonious matter, a kind of worship and incantation rather than amusement.”</span><a href="#note_578" id="noteref_578" name="noteref_578"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">578</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The two principal dances of these Indians, the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">rutuburi</span></span> and the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">yumari</span></span>, are supposed to have been taught them by the turkey and the deer respectively. They are danced by numbers of men and women, the two sexes keeping apart from each other in the dance, while the shaman sings and shakes his rattle. But <span class="tei tei-q">“a large gathering is not necessary in order to pray to the gods by dancing. Sometimes the family dances alone, the father teaching the boys. While doing agricultural work, the Indians often depute one man to dance <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">yumari</span></span> near the house, while the others attend to the work in the fields. It is a curious sight to see a lone man taking his devotional exercise to the tune of his rattle in front of an apparently deserted dwelling. The lonely worshipper is doing his share of the general work by bringing down the fructifying rain and by warding off disaster, while the rest of the family and their friends plant, hoe, weed, or harvest. In the evening, when they return from the field, they may join him for a little while; but often he goes on alone, dancing all night, and singing himself hoarse, and the Indians told me that this is the very hardest kind of work, and exhausting even to them. Solitary worship is also observed by men who go out hunting deer or squirrels for a communal feast. Every one of them dances <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">yumari</span></span> alone in front of his house for two hours to insure success on the hunt; and when putting corn to sprout for the making of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tesvino</span></span> the owner of the house dances for a while, that the corn may sprout well.”</span> Another dance is thought to cause the grass and funguses to grow, and the deer and rabbits to multiply; and another is supposed to draw the clouds together from the north and south, so that they clash and descend in rain.<a href="#note_579" id="noteref_579" name="noteref_579"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">579</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The Cora Indians of Mexico celebrate a festival of sowing shortly before they commit the seed of the maize to the ground. The festival falls in June, because that is the month when the rainy season sets in, supplying the moisture needed for the growth of the maize. At the festival two old women, who represent the goddesses of sowing, dance side by side and imitate the process of sowing by digging holes in the earth with long sticks and inserting the seed of the maize in the holes; whereupon a man who represents the Morning Star pours water on the buried seeds. This solemn dance is accompanied by the singing of an appropriate hymn, which may be compared to the song of the Arval Brothers in ancient Rome.<a href="#note_580" id="noteref_580" name="noteref_580"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">580</span></span></a></p>
					<p>We have seen that in many parts of Germany, Austria, and France the peasants are still, or were till lately, accustomed to dance and leap high in order that the crops may grow tall. Such leaps and dances are sometimes performed by the sower immediately before or after he sows the seed; but often they are executed by the people on a fixed day of the year, which in some places is Twelfth Night (the sixth of January), or Candlemas (the second of February) or Walpurgis Night, that is, the Eve of May Day; but apparently the favourite season for these performances is the last day of the Carnival, namely Shrove Tuesday.<a href="#note_581" id="noteref_581" name="noteref_581"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">581</span></span></a> In such cases the leaps and dances are performed by every man for his own behoof; he skips and jumps merely in order that his own corn, or flax, or hemp may spring up and thrive. But sometimes in modern Europe, as (if I am right) in ancient Rome, the duty of dancing for the crops was committed to bands or troops of men, who cut their capers for the benefit of the whole community. For example, at Grub, in the Swiss canton of the Grisons (Graubünden), the practice used to be as follows. <span class="tei tei-q">“The peasants of Grub,”</span> we are informed, <span class="tei tei-q">“have still some hereditary customs, in that they assembled in some years, mostly at the time of the summer solstice, disguised themselves as maskers so as to be unrecognizable, armed themselves with weapons defensive and offensive, took every man a great club or cudgel, marched in a troop together from one village to another, and executed high leaps and strange antics. They ran full tilt at each other, struck every man his fellow with all his might, so that the blow resounded, and clashed their great staves and cudgels. Hence they were called by the country folk the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Stopfer</span></span>. These foolish pranks they played from a superstitious notion that their corn would thrive the better; but now they have left off, and these <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Stopfer</span></span> are no longer in any repute.”</span> Another authority, after describing the custom, remarks: <span class="tei tei-q">“With this custom was formerly connected the belief that its observance brought a fruitful year.”</span><a href="#note_582" id="noteref_582" name="noteref_582"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">582</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In the Austrian provinces of Salzburg and Tyrol bands of mummers wearing grotesque masks, with bells jingling on their persons, and carrying long sticks or poles in their hands, used formerly to run and leap about on certain days of the year for the purpose of procuring good crops. They were called <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>, a name derived from Perchta, Berchta, or Percht, a mythical old woman, whether goddess or elf, who is well known all over South Germany; Mrs. Perchta (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Frau Perchta</span></span>), as they call her, is to be met with in Elsace, Swabia, Bavaria, Austria, and Switzerland, but nowhere, perhaps, so commonly as in Salzburg and the Tyrol. In the Tyrol she appears as a little old woman with a very wrinkled face, bright lively eyes, and a long hooked nose; her hair is dishevelled, her garments tattered and torn. Hence they say to a slatternly wench, <span class="tei tei-q">“You are a regular Perchta.”</span> She goes about especially during the twelve days from Christmas to Twelfth Night (Epiphany), above all on the Eve of Twelfth Night, which is often called Perchta's Day. Many precautions must be observed during these mystic days in order not to incur her displeasure, for she is mischievous to man and beast. If she appears in the byre, a distemper breaks out among the cows. That is why during these days the byres must be kept very clean and straw laid on the threshold; otherwise you will find bald patches on your sheep and goats next morning, and next summer the hair which has been filched from the animals will descend in hail-stones from the sky. Old Mrs. Perchta also keeps a very sharp eye on spinners during the twelve days; she inspects all distaffs and spinning-wheels in the houses, and if she finds any flax or tow unspun on them, she tears it to bits, and she does not spare the lazy spinner, for she scratches her and smacks her fingers so that they bear the marks of it for the rest of her life. Indeed she sometimes does much more; for she rips up the belly of the sluggard and stuffs it with flax. That is the punishment with which a Bavarian mother will threaten an idle jade of a girl who has left some flax on her distaff on New Year's Eve. However, they say in Bavaria that if you only eat plenty of the rich juicy cakes which are baked for Mrs. Perchta on her day, the old woman's knife will glance off your body without making any impression on it. Perchta often comes not alone but attended by many little children, who follow her as chickens waddle after the mother hen; and if you should see any little child lagging behind the rest and blubbering, you may be quite sure that that child has been baptized. On the Eve of Twelfth Night everybody should eat pancakes baked of meal and milk or water. If anybody does not do so, old Mrs. Perchta comes and slits up his stomach, takes out the other food, fills up the vacuity so created with a tangled skein and bricks, and then sews up the orifice neatly, using, singularly enough, a ploughshare for a needle and an iron chain for thread. In other or the same places she does the same thing to anybody who does not eat herrings and dumplings on Twelfth Night. Some say that she rides on the storm like the Wild Huntsman, followed by a boisterous noisy pack, and carrying off people into far countries. Yet withal old Mrs. Perchta has her redeeming qualities. Good children who spin diligently and learn their lessons she rewards with nuts and sugar plums. It has even been affirmed that she makes the ploughed land fruitful and causes the cattle to thrive. When a mist floats over the fields, the peasants see her figure gliding along in a white mantle. On the Eve of Twelfth Night good people leave the remains of their supper for her on the table, and when they have gone to bed and all is quiet in the house, she comes in the likeness of an old wizened little woman, with all the children about her, and partakes of the broken victuals. But woe to the prying wight who peeps at her through the key-hole! Many a man has been blinded by her for a whole year as a punishment for his ill-timed curiosity.<a href="#note_583" id="noteref_583" name="noteref_583"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">583</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The processions of maskers who took their name of <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> from this quaint creation of the popular fancy were known as <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>-running or <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>-leaping from the runs and leaps which the men took in their wild headlong course through the streets and over the fields. They appear to have been held in all the Alpine regions of Germany, but are best known to us in the Tyrol and Salzburg. The appropriate season for the celebration of the rite was Perchta's Day, that is, Twelfth Night or Epiphany, the sixth of January, but in some places it was held on Shrove Tuesday, the last day of the Carnival, the very day when many farmers of Central Europe jump to make the crops grow tall. Corresponding to the double character of Perchta as a power for good and evil, the maskers are divided into two sets known respectively as the Beautiful and the Ugly <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>. At Lienz in the Tyrol, where the maskers made their appearance on Shrove Tuesday, the Beautiful <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> were decked with ribbons, galloons, and so forth, while the ugly <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> made themselves as hideous as they could by hanging rats and mice, chains and bells about their persons. All wore on their heads tall pointed caps with bells attached to them; their faces were concealed by masks, and in their hands they all carried long sticks. The sticks of the Beautiful <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> were adorned with ribbons; those of the Ugly <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> ended in the heads of devils. Thus equipped they leaped and ran about the streets and went into the houses. Amongst them was a clown who blew ashes and soot in people's faces through a blow-pipe. It was all very merry and frolicsome, except when <span class="tei tei-q">“the wild Perchta”</span> herself came, invisible to ordinary eyes, upon the scene. Then her namesakes the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> grew wild and furious too; they scattered and fled for their lives to the nearest house, for as soon as they got under the gutter of a roof they were safe. But if she caught them, she tore them in pieces. To this day you may see the graves where the mangled bodies of her victims lie buried. When no such interruption took place, the noisy rout of maskers rushed madly about, with jingling bells and resounding cracks of whips, entering the houses, dancing here, drinking there, teasing wayfarers, or racing from village to village like the Wild Hunt itself in the sky; till at the close of the winter day the church bells rang the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ave Maria</span></span>. Then at last the wild uproar died away into silence. Such tumultuous masquerades were thought to be very beneficial to the crops; a bad harvest would be set down to the omission of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> to skip and jump about in their usual fashion.<a href="#note_584" id="noteref_584" name="noteref_584"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">584</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In the province of Salzburg the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> mummers are also divided into two sets, the Beautiful <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> and the Ugly <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>. The Ugly <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> are properly speaking twelve young men dressed in black sheepskins and wearing hoods of badger-skins and grotesque wooden masks, which represent either coarse human features with long teeth and horns, or else the features of fabulous animals with beaks and bristles or movable jaws. They all carry bells, both large and small, fastened to broad leathern girdles. The procession was headed by a man with a big drum, and after him came lads bearing huge torches and lanterns fastened to tall poles; for in Salzburg or some parts of it these mummers played their pranks by night. Behind the torchbearers came two Fools, a male and a female, the latter acted by a lad in woman's clothes. The male Fool carried a sausage-like roll, with which he struck at all women or girls of his acquaintance when they shewed themselves at the open doors or windows. Along with the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> themselves went a train of young fellows cracking whips, blowing horns, or jingling bells. The ways might be miry and the night pitch dark, but with flaring lights the procession swept rapidly by, the men leaping along with the help of their long sticks and waking the echoes of the slumbering valley by their loud uproar. From time to time they stopped at a farm, danced and cut their capers before the house, for which they were rewarded by presents of food and strong drink; to offer them money would have been an insult. By midnight the performance came to an end, and the tired maskers dispersed to their homes.</p>
					<p>The Beautiful <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> in Salzburg are attired very differently from the Ugly <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>, but their costume varies with the district. Thus in the Pongau district the distinctive feature of their costume is a tall and heavy framework covered with bright red cloth and decorated with a profusion of silver jewelry and filagree work. This framework is sometimes nine or ten feet high and forty or fifty pounds in weight. The performer carries it above his head by means of iron supports resting on his shoulders or his back. To run or jump under the weight of such an encumbrance is impossible; the dancer has to content himself with turning round and round slowly and clumsily. Very different is the headdress of the Beautiful <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> in the Pinzgau district of Salzburg. There the performers are dressed in scarlet and wear straw hats, from which bunches of white feathers, arranged like fans, nod and flutter in the wind. Red shoes and white stockings complete their attire. Thus lightly equipped they hop and jump and stamp briskly in the dance. Unlike their Ugly namesakes, who seem now to be extinct, the Beautiful <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> still parade from time to time among the peasantry of the Salzburg highlands; but the intervals between their appearances are irregular, varying from four to seven years or more. Unlike the Ugly <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>, they wear no masks and appear in full daylight, always on Perchta's Day (Twelfth Night, the sixth of January) and the two following Sundays. They are attended by a train of followers who make a great din with bells, whips, pipes, horns, rattles, and chains. Amongst them one or two clowns, clothed in white and wearing tall pointed hats of white felt with many jingling bells attached to them, play a conspicuous part. They carry each a sausage-shaped roll stuffed with tow, and with this instrument they strike lightly such women and girls among the spectators as they desire particularly to favour. Another attendant carries the effigy of a baby in swaddling bands, made of linen rags, and fastened to a string; this effigy he throws at women and girls and then pulls back again, but he does this only to women and girls whom he respects and to whom he wishes well. At St. Johann the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> carry drawn swords; each is attended by a lad dressed as a woman; and they are followed by men clad in black sheepskins, wearing the masks of devils, and holding chains in their hands.<a href="#note_585" id="noteref_585" name="noteref_585"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">585</span></span></a></p>
					<p>What is the meaning of the quaint performances still enacted by the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> and their attendants in the Austrian highlands? The subject has been carefully investigated by a highly competent enquirer, Mrs. Andree-Eysn. She has visited the districts, witnessed the performances, collected information, and studied the costumes. It may be well to quote her conclusion: <span class="tei tei-q">“If we enquire into the inner meaning which underlies the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>-race and kindred processions, we must confess that it is not at first sight obvious, and that the original meaning appears blurred and indistinct. Nevertheless from many features which they present in common it can be demonstrated that the processions were held for the purpose of driving away demons and had for their object to promote fertility. In favour of this view it may be urged, first of all, that their appearance is everywhere greeted with joy, because it promises fertility and a good harvest. <span class="tei tei-q">‘It is a good year,’</span> they say in Salzburg. If the processions are prevented from taking place, dearth and a bad harvest are to be apprehended. The peasants of the Tyrol still believe that the more <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> run about, the better will the year be, and therefore they treat them to brandy and cakes. In Lienz, when the harvest turns out ill, they say that they omitted to let the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> run over the fields, and for that reason the peasant in the Sarn valley gets the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> to leap about on his fields, for then there will be a good year.</span></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“If fertility and blessing are to be poured out on field, house, and homestead, it is obvious that everything that could hinder or harm must be averted and driven away. When we consider how even at the present time, and still more in times gone by, much that is harmful is attributed to the malevolence of invisible powers, we can readily understand why people should resort to measures which they deem effective for the purpose of disarming these malevolent beings. Now it is a common belief that certain masks possess the virtue of banning demons, and that loud noise and din are a means of keeping off evil spirits or hindering their activity. In the procession of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> we see the principle of the banishment of evil carried out in practice. The people attack the evil spirits and seek to chase them away by putting on frightful masks, with which they confront the demon. For one sort of malevolent spirits one kind of mask appears suitable, and for another another; this spirit is daunted by this mask, and that spirit by that; and so they came to discriminate. Originally, particular masks may have been used against particular evil spirits, but in course of time they were confused, the individual taste of the maker of the mask counted for something, and so gradually it resulted in carving all kinds of horrible, fantastic, and hideous masks which had nothing in common but their general tendency to frighten away all evil spirits.”</span><a href="#note_586" id="noteref_586" name="noteref_586">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">586</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<p>In support of her view that the procession of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> aims chiefly at banishing demons who might otherwise blight the crops, Mrs. Andree-Eysn lays stress on the bells which figure so prominently in the costume of these maskers; for the sound of bells, as she reminds us, is commonly believed to be a potent means of driving evil spirits away. The notion is too familiar to call for proof,<a href="#note_587" id="noteref_587" name="noteref_587"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">587</span></span></a> but a single case from Central Africa may be cited as an illustration. The Teso people, who inhabit a land of rolling plains between Mount Elgon and Lake Kioga, <span class="tei tei-q">“make use of bells to exorcise the storm fiend; a person who has been injured by a flash or in the resulting fire wears bells round his ankles for weeks afterwards. Whenever rain threatens, and rain in Uganda almost always comes in company with thunder and lightning, this person will parade the village for an hour, with the jingling bells upon his legs and a wand of papyrus in his hand, attended by as many of his family as may happen to be at hand and not employed in necessary duties.”</span><a href="#note_588" id="noteref_588" name="noteref_588"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">588</span></span></a> The resemblance of such men, with their bells and wands, to the Austrian <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> with their bells and wands is, on the theory in question, fairly close; both of them go about to dispel demons by the sound of their bells and probably also by the blows of their rods. Whatever may be thought of their efficacy in banning fiends, certain it is that in the Tyrol, where the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> play their pranks, the chime of bells is used for the express purpose of causing the grass to grow in spring. Thus in the lower valley of the Inn, especially at Schwaz, on the twenty-fourth of April (there reckoned St. George's Day) troops of young fellows go about ringing bells, some of which they hold in their hands, while others are attached to their persons; and the peasants say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wherever the Grass-ringers come, there the grass grows well, and the corn bears abundant fruit.”</span> Hence the bell-ringers are welcomed and treated wherever they go. Formerly, it is said, they wore masks, like the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span>, but afterwards they contented themselves with blackening their faces with soot.<a href="#note_589" id="noteref_589" name="noteref_589"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">589</span></span></a> In other parts of the Tyrol the bell-ringing processions take place at the Carnival, but their object is the same; for <span class="tei tei-q">“it is believed that by this noisy procession growth in general, but especially the growth of the meadows, is promoted.”</span><a href="#note_590" id="noteref_590" name="noteref_590"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">590</span></span></a> Again, at Bergell, in the Swiss canton of the Grisons, children go in procession on the first of March ringing bells, <span class="tei tei-q">“in order that the grass may grow.”</span><a href="#note_591" id="noteref_591" name="noteref_591"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">591</span></span></a> So in Hildesheim, on the afternoon of Ascension Day, young girls ascend the church tower and ring all the church bells, <span class="tei tei-q">“in order that they may get a good harvest of flax; the girl who, hanging on to the bell-rope, is swung highest by the swing of the bell, will get the longest flax.”</span><a href="#note_592" id="noteref_592" name="noteref_592"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">592</span></span></a> Here the sound of the bells as a means of promoting the growth of the flax is reinforced by the upward swing of the bell, which, carrying with it the bell-ringer at the end of the rope, naturally causes the flax in like manner to rise high in the air. It is a simple piece of imitative magic, like the leaps and bounds which the peasants of Central Europe often execute for precisely the same purpose. Once more, in various parts of the Tyrol on Senseless Thursday, which is the last Thursday in Carnival, young men in motley attire, with whips and brooms, run about cracking their whips and making believe to sweep away the onlookers with their brooms. They are called <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Huttler</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Huddler</span></span>. The people say that if these fellows do not run about, the flax will not thrive, and that on the contrary the more of them run about, the better will the flax grow. And where there are many of them, there will be much maize.<a href="#note_593" id="noteref_593" name="noteref_593"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">593</span></span></a> In this custom the cracking of the whips may be supposed to serve the same purpose as the ringing of the bells by frightening and banishing the demons of infertility and dearth. About Hall, in the northern Tyrol, the ceremony of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Hudel</span></span>-running, as it is called, is or used to be as follows. A peasant-farmer, generally well-to-do and respected, rigs himself out in motley and hides his face under a mask; round his waist he wears a girdle crammed with rolls, while in his hand he wields a long whip, from which more than fifty cracknels dangle on a string. Thus arrayed he suddenly bursts from the ale-house door into the public view, solicited thereto by the cries of the street urchins, who have been anxiously waiting for his appearance. He throws amongst them the string of cracknels, and while they are scrambling for these dainties, he lays on to them most liberally with his whip. Having faithfully discharged this public duty, he marches down between rows of peasants, who have meantime taken up their position in a long street. Amongst them he picks out one who is to run before him. The man selected for the honour accordingly takes to his heels, hotly pursued by the other with the whip, who lashes the feet of the fugitive till he comes up with him. Having run him down, he leads him back to the alehouse, where he treats him to a roll and a glass of wine. After that the masker runs a similar race with another man; and so it goes on, one race after another, till the sun sets. Then the mummer doffs his mask and leads the dance in the alehouse. The object of these races is said to be to ensure a good crop of flax and maize.<a href="#note_594" id="noteref_594" name="noteref_594"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">594</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In these races of mummers, whether known as <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Huttler</span></span>, there are certain features which it is difficult to explain on the theory that the aim of the performers is simply to drive away demons, and that the hideous masks which they assume have no other intention than that of frightening these uncanny beings. For observe that in the last example the blows of the whip fall not on the airy swarms of invisible spirits, but on the solid persons of street urchins and sturdy yokels, who can hardly be supposed to receive the chastisement vicariously for the demons. Again, what are we to make of the rolls and cracknels with which in this case the mummer is laden, and which he distributes among his victims, as if to console them in one part of their person for the pain which he has inflicted on another? Surely this bounty seems to invest him with something more than the purely negative character of an exorciser of evil; it appears to raise him to the positive character of a dispenser of good. The same remark applies to the action of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> who strike women lightly, as a mark of friendship and regard, with the sausage-like rolls which they carry in their hands, or throw them, as a mark of favour, the effigy of a baby. The only probable explanation of these practices, as Mrs. Andree-Eysn rightly points out, is that the mummers thereby intend to fertilize the women whom they honour by these attentions.<a href="#note_595" id="noteref_595" name="noteref_595"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">595</span></span></a> Here, again, therefore the maskers appear as the actual dispensers of good, the bestowers of fruitfulness, not merely the averters of evil. If that is so, we seem bound to infer that these masked men represent or embody the spirits who quicken the seed both in the earth and in the wombs of women. That was the view of W. Mannhardt, the highest authority on the agricultural superstitions of European peasantry. After reviewing these and many more similar processions, he concludes that if the comparison which he has instituted between them holds good, all these various mummers <span class="tei tei-q">“were intended by the original founders of the processions to represent demons of vegetation, who by their mere appearance and cries drove away the powers that hinder growth and woke to new life the slumbering spirits of the grasses and corn-stalks.”</span><a href="#note_596" id="noteref_596" name="noteref_596"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">596</span></span></a> Thus Mannhardt admitted that these noisy processions of masked men are really supposed to dispel the evil spirits of blight and infertility, while at the same time he held that the men themselves originally personated vegetation-spirits. And he thought it probable that the original significance of these performances was in later times misunderstood and interpreted as a simple expulsion of witches and other uncanny beings that haunt the fields.<a href="#note_597" id="noteref_597" name="noteref_597"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">597</span></span></a></p>
					<p>On the whole this conclusion of an enquirer remarkable for a rare combination of learning, sobriety, and insight, is perhaps the most probable that can now be reached with the evidence at our disposal. It is confirmed by some of the savage masquerades in which the maskers definitely represent spirits of fertility in order to promote the fruitfulness of the earth and of women;<a href="#note_598" id="noteref_598" name="noteref_598"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">598</span></span></a> and it is supported by the evidence of many other rustic mummeries in Europe, for example, by the English rites of Plough Monday, in which the dancers, or rather jumpers, who wore bunches of corn in their hats as they leaped into the air, are most naturally interpreted as agents or representatives of the corn-spirit.<a href="#note_599" id="noteref_599" name="noteref_599"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">599</span></span></a> It is, therefore, worth observing that in some places the dancers of Plough Monday, who attended the plough in its peregrinations through the streets and fields, are described as morris-dancers.<a href="#note_600" id="noteref_600" name="noteref_600"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">600</span></span></a> If the description is correct, it implies that they had bells attached to their costume, which would further assimilate them to the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> and other masqueraders of Central Europe; for the chief characteristic of the morris-dance is that the performers wear bells fastened to their legs which jingle at every step.<a href="#note_601" id="noteref_601" name="noteref_601"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">601</span></span></a> We may suppose that if the men who ran and capered beside the plough on Plough Monday really wore bells, the original intention of this appendage to their costume was either to dispel the demons who might hinder the growth of the corn, or to waken the spirits of vegetation from their long winter sleep. In favour of the view which sees in all these dances and mummeries rather the banishment of what is evil than the direct promotion of what is good, it may be urged that some of the dancers wear swords,<a href="#note_602" id="noteref_602" name="noteref_602"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">602</span></span></a> a weapon which certainly seems better fitted to combat demons than to prune fruit-trees or turn up the sod. Further, it deserves to be noted that many of the performances take place either on Twelfth Day or, like the celebration of Plough Monday, very shortly after it; and that in the Lord of Misrule, who reigned from Christmas to Twelfth Day,<a href="#note_603" id="noteref_603" name="noteref_603"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">603</span></span></a> we have a clear trace of one of those periods of general licence and suspension of ordinary government, which so commonly occur at the end of the old year or the beginning of the new one in connexion with a general expulsion of evils.</p>
					<p>Surveying these masquerades and processions, as they have been or still are celebrated in modern Europe, we may say in general that they appear to have been originally intended both to stimulate the growth of vegetation in spring and to expel the demoniac or other evil influences which were thought to have accumulated during the preceding winter or year; and that these two motives of stimulation and expulsion, blended and perhaps confused together, appear to explain the quaint costumes of the mummers, the multitudinous noises which they make, and the blows which they direct either at invisible foes or at the visible and tangible persons of their fellows. In the latter case the beating may be supposed to serve as a means of forcibly freeing the sufferers from the demons or other evil things that cling to them unseen.</p>
					<p>To apply these conclusions to the Roman custom of expelling Mamurius Veturius or <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Mars”</span> every year in spring, we may say that they lend some support to the theory which sees in <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Mars”</span> the outworn deity of vegetation driven away to make room, either for a younger and more vigorous personification of vernal life, or perhaps for the return of the same deity refreshed and renovated by the treatment to which he had been subjected, and particularly by the vigorous application of the rod to his sacred person. For, as we shall see presently, King Solomon was by no means singular in his opinion of the refreshing influence of a sound thrashing. So far as <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Mars”</span> was supposed to carry away with him the accumulated weaknesses and other evils of the past year, so far would he serve as a public scapegoat, like the effigy in the Slavonic custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death,”</span> which appears not only to represent the vegetation-spirit of the past year, but also to act as a scapegoat, carrying away with it a heavy load of suffering, misfortune, and death.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc39" name="toc39"/>
					<a id="pdf40" name="pdf40"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. The Human Scapegoat in Ancient Greece.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>The ancient Greeks were also familiar with the use of a human scapegoat. In Plutarch's native town of Chaeronea a ceremony of this kind was performed by the chief magistrate at the Town Hall, and by each householder at his own home. It was called the <span class="tei tei-q">“expulsion of hunger.”</span> A slave was beaten with rods of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">agnus castus</span></span>, and turned out of doors with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“Out with hunger, and in with wealth and health.”</span> When Plutarch held the office of chief magistrate of his native town he performed this ceremony at the Town Hall, and he has recorded the discussion to which the custom afterwards gave rise.<a href="#note_604" id="noteref_604" name="noteref_604"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">604</span></span></a> The ceremony closely resembles the Japanese, Hindoo, and Highland customs already described.<a href="#note_605" id="noteref_605" name="noteref_605"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">605</span></span></a></p>
					<p>But in civilized Greece the custom of the scapegoat took darker forms than the innocent rite over which the amiable and pious Plutarch presided. Whenever Marseilles, one of the busiest and most brilliant of Greek colonies, was ravaged by a plague, a man of the poorer classes used to offer himself as a scapegoat. For a whole year he was maintained at the public expense, being fed on choice and pure food. At the expiry of the year he was dressed in sacred garments, decked with holy branches, and led through the whole city, while prayers were uttered that all the evils of the people might fall on his head. He was then cast out of the city or stoned to death by the people outside of the walls.<a href="#note_606" id="noteref_606" name="noteref_606"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">606</span></span></a> The Athenians regularly maintained a number of degraded and useless beings at the public expense; and when any calamity, such as plague, drought, or famine, befell the city, they sacrificed two of these outcasts as scapegoats. One of the victims was sacrificed for the men and the other for the women. The former wore round his neck a string of black, the latter a string of white figs. Sometimes, it seems, the victim slain on behalf of the women was a woman. They were led about the city and then sacrificed, apparently by being stoned to death outside the city.<a href="#note_607" id="noteref_607" name="noteref_607"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">607</span></span></a> But such sacrifices were not confined to extraordinary occasions of public calamity; it appears that every year, at the festival of the Thargelia in May, two victims, one for the men and one for the women, were led out of Athens and stoned to death.<a href="#note_608" id="noteref_608" name="noteref_608"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">608</span></span></a> The city of Abdera in Thrace was publicly purified once a year, and one of the burghers, set apart for the purpose, was stoned to death as a scapegoat or vicarious sacrifice for the life of all the others; six days before his execution he was excommunicated, <span class="tei tei-q">“in order that he alone might bear the sins of all the people.”</span><a href="#note_609" id="noteref_609" name="noteref_609"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">609</span></span></a></p>
					<p>From the Lover's Leap, a white bluff at the southern end of their island, the Leucadians used annually to hurl a criminal into the sea as a scapegoat. But to lighten his fall they fastened live birds and feathers to him, and a flotilla of small boats waited below to catch him and convey him beyond the boundary. Probably these humane precautions were a mitigation of an earlier custom of flinging the scapegoat into the sea to drown, just as in Kumaon the custom of letting a man slide down a rope from the top of a cliff appears to be a modification of an older practice of putting him to death. The Leucadian ceremony took place at the time of a sacrifice to Apollo, who had a temple or sanctuary on the spot.<a href="#note_610" id="noteref_610" name="noteref_610"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">610</span></span></a> Elsewhere it was customary to cast a young man every year into the sea, with the prayer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Be thou our offscouring.”</span> This ceremony was supposed to rid the people of the evils by which they were beset, or according to a somewhat different interpretation it redeemed them by paying the debt they owed to the sea-god.<a href="#note_611" id="noteref_611" name="noteref_611"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">611</span></span></a> As practised by the Greeks of Asia Minor in the sixth century before our era, the custom of the scapegoat was as follows. When a city suffered from plague, famine, or other public calamity, an ugly or deformed person was chosen to take upon himself all the evils which afflicted the community. He was brought to a suitable place, where dried figs, a barley loaf, and cheese were put into his hand. These he ate. Then he was beaten seven times upon his genital organs with squills and branches of the wild fig and other wild trees, while the flutes played a particular tune. Afterwards he was burned on a pyre built of the wood of forest trees; and his ashes were cast into the sea.<a href="#note_612" id="noteref_612" name="noteref_612"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">612</span></span></a> A similar custom appears to have been annually celebrated by the Asiatic Greeks at the harvest festival of the Thargelia.<a href="#note_613" id="noteref_613" name="noteref_613"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">613</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In the ritual just described the scourging of the victim with squills, branches of the wild fig, and so forth, cannot have been intended to aggravate his sufferings, otherwise any stick would have been good enough to beat him with. The true meaning of this part of the ceremony has been explained by W. Mannhardt.<a href="#note_614" id="noteref_614" name="noteref_614"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">614</span></span></a> He points out that the ancients attributed to squills a magical power of averting evil influences, and that accordingly they hung them up at the doors of their houses and made use of them in purificatory rites.<a href="#note_615" id="noteref_615" name="noteref_615"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">615</span></span></a> Hence the Arcadian custom of whipping the image of Pan with squills at a festival, or whenever the hunters returned empty-handed,<a href="#note_616" id="noteref_616" name="noteref_616"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">616</span></span></a> must have been meant, not to punish the god, but to purify him from the harmful influences which were impeding him in the exercise of his divine functions as a god who should supply the hunter with game. Similarly the object of beating the human scapegoat on the genital organs with squills and so on, must have been to release his reproductive energies from any restraint or spell under which they might be laid by demoniacal or other malignant agency; and as the Thargelia at which he was annually sacrificed was an early harvest festival celebrated in May,<a href="#note_617" id="noteref_617" name="noteref_617"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">617</span></span></a> we must recognize in him a representative of the creative and fertilizing god of vegetation. The representative of the god was annually slain for the purpose I have indicated, that of maintaining the divine life in perpetual vigour, untainted by the weakness of age; and before he was put to death it was not unnatural to stimulate his reproductive powers in order that these might be transmitted in full activity to his successor, the new god or new embodiment of the old god, who was doubtless supposed immediately to take the place of the one slain.<a href="#note_618" id="noteref_618" name="noteref_618"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">618</span></span></a> Similar reasoning would lead to a similar treatment of the scapegoat on special occasions, such as drought or famine. If the crops did not answer to the expectation of the husbandman, this would be attributed to some failure in the generative powers of the god whose function it was to produce the fruits of the earth. It might be thought that he was under a spell or was growing old and feeble. Accordingly he was slain in the person of his representative, with all the ceremonies already described, in order that, born young again, he might infuse his own youthful vigour into the stagnant energies of nature. On the same principle we can understand why Mamurius Veturius was beaten with rods, why the slave at the Chaeronean ceremony was beaten with the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">agnus castus</span></span> (a tree to which magical properties were ascribed),<a href="#note_619" id="noteref_619" name="noteref_619"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">619</span></span></a> why the effigy of Death in some parts of Europe is assailed with sticks and stones,<a href="#note_620" id="noteref_620" name="noteref_620"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">620</span></span></a> and why at Babylon the criminal who played the god was scourged before he was crucified.<a href="#note_621" id="noteref_621" name="noteref_621"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">621</span></span></a> The purpose of the scourging was not to intensify the agony of the divine sufferer, but on the contrary to dispel any malignant influences by which at the supreme moment he might conceivably be beset.</p>
					<p>Thus far I have assumed that the human victims at the Thargelia represented the spirits of vegetation in general,<a href="#note_622" id="noteref_622" name="noteref_622"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">622</span></span></a> but it has been well remarked by Mr. W. R. Paton that these poor wretches seem to have masqueraded as the spirits of fig-trees in particular. He points out that the process of caprification, as it is called, that is, the artificial fertilization of the cultivated fig-trees by hanging strings of wild figs among the boughs, takes place in Greece and Asia Minor in June about a month after the date of the Thargelia, and he suggests that the hanging of the black and white figs round the necks of the two human victims, one of whom represented the men and the other the women, may have been a direct imitation of the process of caprification designed, on the principle of imitative magic, to assist the fertilization of the fig-trees. And since caprification is in fact a marriage of the male fig-tree with the female fig-tree, Mr. Paton further supposes that the loves of the trees may, on the same principle of imitative magic, have been simulated by a mock or even a real marriage between the two human victims, one of whom appears sometimes to have been a woman. On this view the practice of beating the human victims on their genitals with branches of wild fig-trees and with squills was a charm intended to stimulate the generative powers of the man and woman who for the time being personated the male and the female fig-trees respectively, and who by their union in marriage, whether real or pretended, were believed to help the trees to bear fruit.<a href="#note_623" id="noteref_623" name="noteref_623"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">623</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The theory is ingenious and attractive; and to some extent it is borne out by the Roman celebration of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Nonae Caprotinae</span></span>, which I have described in an earlier part of this work.<a href="#note_624" id="noteref_624" name="noteref_624"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">624</span></span></a> For on the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Nonae Caprotinae</span></span>, the ninth of July, the female slaves, in the attire of free women, feasted under a wild fig-tree, cut a rod from the tree, beat each other, perhaps with the rod, and offered the milky juice of the tree to the goddess Juno Caprotina, whose surname seems to point her out as the goddess of the wild fig-tree (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">caprificus</span></span>). Here the rites performed in July by women under the wild fig-tree, which the ancients rightly regarded as a male and employed to fertilize the cultivated female fig-tree, can hardly be dissociated from the caprification or artificial marriage of the fig-trees which, according to Columella, was best performed in July; and if the blows which the women gave each other on this occasion were administered, as seems highly probable, by the rod which they cut from the wild fig-tree, the parallel between the Roman and the Greek ceremony would be still closer; since the Greeks, as we saw, beat the genitals of the human victims with branches of wild fig-trees. It is true that the human sacrifices, which formed so prominent a feature in the Greek celebration of the Thargelia, do not figure in the Roman celebration of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Nonae Caprotinae</span></span> within historical times; yet a trace of them may perhaps be detected in the tradition that Romulus himself mysteriously disappeared on that very day in the midst of a tremendous thunder-storm, while he was reviewing his army outside the walls of Rome at the Goat's Marsh (<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">ad Caprae paludem</span></span>”</span>), a name which suggests that the place was not far distant from the wild fig-tree or the goat-fig (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">caprificus</span></span>), as the Romans called it, where the slave women performed their curious ceremonies. The legend that he was cut in pieces by the patricians, who carried away the morsels of his body under their robes and buried them in the earth,<a href="#note_625" id="noteref_625" name="noteref_625"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">625</span></span></a> exactly describes the treatment which the Khonds used to accord to the bodies of the human victims for the purpose of fertilizing their fields.<a href="#note_626" id="noteref_626" name="noteref_626"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">626</span></span></a> Can the king have played at Rome the same fatal part in the fertilization of fig-trees which, if Mr. Paton is right, was played in Greece by the male victim? The traditionary time, place, and manner of his death all suggest it. So many coincidences between the Greek and Roman ceremonies and traditions can hardly be wholly accidental; and accordingly I incline to think that there may well be an element of truth in Mr. Paton's theory, though it must be confessed that the ancient writers who describe the Greek custom appear to regard it merely as a purification of the city and not at all as a mode of fertilizing fig-trees.<a href="#note_627" id="noteref_627" name="noteref_627"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">627</span></span></a> In similar ceremonies, which combine the elements of purification and fertilization, the notion of purification apparently tends gradually to overshadow the notion of fertilization in the minds of those who practise the rites. It seems to have been so in the case of the annual expulsion of Mamurius Veturius from ancient Rome and in the parallel processions of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Perchten</span></span> in modern Europe; it may have been so also in the case of the human sacrifices at the Thargelia.<a href="#note_628" id="noteref_628" name="noteref_628"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">628</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The interpretation which I have adopted of the custom of beating the human scapegoat with certain plants is supported by many analogies. We have already met with examples of a practice of beating sick people with the leaves of certain plants or with branches in order to rid them of noxious influences.<a href="#note_629" id="noteref_629" name="noteref_629"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">629</span></span></a> Some of the Dravidian tribes of Northern India, who attribute epilepsy, hysteria, and similar maladies to demoniacal possession, endeavour to cure the sufferer by thrashing him soundly with a sacred iron chain, which is believed to have the effect of immediately expelling the demon.<a href="#note_630" id="noteref_630" name="noteref_630"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">630</span></span></a> When a herd of camels refuses to drink, the Arabs will sometimes beat the male beasts on the back to drive away the jinn who are riding them and frightening the females.<a href="#note_631" id="noteref_631" name="noteref_631"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">631</span></span></a> In Bikol, the south-western part of Luzon, it was generally believed that if the evil spirit Aswang were not properly exorcised he took possession of the bodies of the dead and tormented them. Hence to deliver a corpse from his clutches the native priestesses used to beat it with a brush or whisk made of the leaves of the aromatic China orange, while they chanted a certain song, throwing their bodies into contortions and uttering shrill cries, as if the evil spirit had entered into themselves. The soul of the deceased, thus delivered from the cruel tyranny of Aswang, was then free to roam at pleasure along the charming lanes or in the thick shade of the forest.<a href="#note_632" id="noteref_632" name="noteref_632"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">632</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Sometimes it appears that a beating is administered for the purpose of ridding people of a ghost who may be clinging too closely to their persons; in such cases the blows, though they descend on the bodies of the living, are really aimed at the spirit of the dead, and have no other object than to drive it away, just as a coachman will flick the back of a horse with his whip to rid the beast of a fly. At a funeral in the island of Halmahera, before the coffin is lowered into the grave, all the relations whip themselves on the head and shoulders with wands made of plants which are believed to possess the power of keeping off evil spirits. The intention of the custom is said to be to bring back their own spectres or souls and to prevent them from following the ghost; but this may fairly be interpreted to mean that the blows are directed to brushing off the ghost, who would otherwise abstract the soul of the person on whose body he was allowed to settle. This interpretation is strongly confirmed by the practice, observed by the same people on the same occasion, of throwing the trunk of a banana-tree into the grave, and telling the dead man that it is a companion for him; for this practice is expressly intended to prevent the deceased from feeling lonely, and so coming back to fetch away a friend.<a href="#note_633" id="noteref_633" name="noteref_633"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">633</span></span></a> When Mr. Batchelor returned to a hut after visiting the grave of an old Aino woman, her relations brought him a bowl of water to the door and requested him to wash his face and hands. While he did so, the women beat him and brushed him down with sacred whittled sticks (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">inao</span></span>). On enquiring into the meaning of this treatment, he discovered that it was intended to purify him from all uncleanness contracted at the grave through contact with the ghost of the deceased, and that the beating and brushing with the whittled sticks had for its object to drive away all evil influences and diseases with which the ghost of the old woman might have attempted to infect him out of spite for his trespassing on her domain.<a href="#note_634" id="noteref_634" name="noteref_634"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">634</span></span></a> The Banmanas of Senegambia think that the soul of a dead infant becomes for a time a wandering and maleficent spirit. Accordingly when a baby dies, all the uncircumcised children of the same sex in the village run about the streets in a band, each armed with three or four supple rods. Some of them enter every house to beg, and while they are doing so, one of the troop, propping himself against the wall with his hands, is lashed by another of the children on his back or legs till the blood flows. Each of the children takes it in turn to be thus whipped. The object of the whipping, we are told, <span class="tei tei-q">“appears to be to preserve the uncircumcised child from being carried off by its comrade who has just died.”</span><a href="#note_635" id="noteref_635" name="noteref_635"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">635</span></span></a> The severe scourgings inflicted on each other by some South American Indians at ceremonies connected with the dead may be similarly intended to chase away the dangerous ghost, who is conceived as sticking like a leech or a bur to the skin of the living.<a href="#note_636" id="noteref_636" name="noteref_636"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">636</span></span></a> The ancient Greeks employed the laurel very commonly as an instrument of ceremonial purification;<a href="#note_637" id="noteref_637" name="noteref_637"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">637</span></span></a> and from the monuments which represent the purgation of Orestes from the guilt of matricide<a href="#note_638" id="noteref_638" name="noteref_638"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">638</span></span></a> it seems probable that the regular rite of cleansing a homicide consisted essentially in sprinkling him with pig's blood and beating him with a laurel bough, for the purpose, as we may conjecture, of whisking away the wrathful ghost of his victim, who was thought to buzz about him like an angry wasp in summer. If that was so, the Greek ritual of purification singularly resembles the Nicobarese ceremony of exorcism; for when a man is supposed to be possessed by devils, the Nicobarese rub him all over with pig's blood and beat him with bunches of certain leaves, to which a special power of exorcising demons is attributed. As fast as each devil is thus disengaged from his person, it is carefully folded up in leaves, to be afterwards thrown into the sea at daybreak.<a href="#note_639" id="noteref_639" name="noteref_639"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">639</span></span></a></p>
					<p>At the autumn festival in Peru people used to strike each other with torches, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Let all harm go away.”</span><a href="#note_640" id="noteref_640" name="noteref_640"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">640</span></span></a> Every year when the Pleiades reappeared in the sky, the Guaycurus, an Indian nation of the Gran Chaco, held a festival of rejoicing, at which men, women, and children all thrashed each other, expecting thereby to procure health, abundance, and victory over their enemies.<a href="#note_641" id="noteref_641" name="noteref_641"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">641</span></span></a> Indians of the Quixos, in South America, before they set out on a long hunting expedition, cause their wives to whip them with nettles, believing that this renders them fleeter, and helps them to overtake the peccaries. They resort to the same proceeding as a cure for sickness.<a href="#note_642" id="noteref_642" name="noteref_642"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">642</span></span></a> The Roocooyen Indians of French Guiana train up young people in the way they should go by causing them to be stung by ants and wasps; and at the ceremony held for this purpose the grown-up people improve the occasion by allowing themselves to be whacked by the chief with a stick over the arms, the legs, and the chest. They appear to labour under an impression that this conveys to them all sorts of moral and physical excellences. One of the tribe, ambitious of acquiring the European virtues, begged a French traveller to be so kind as to give him a good hiding. The traveller obligingly did his best to gratify him, and the face of the Indian beamed with gratitude as the blows fell on his naked back.<a href="#note_643" id="noteref_643" name="noteref_643"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">643</span></span></a> The Delaware Indians had two sovereign remedies for sin; one was an emetic, the other a thrashing. In the latter case, the remedy was administered by means of twelve different sticks, with which the sinner was belaboured from the soles of his feet up to his neck. In both cases the sins were supposed to be expelled from the body, and to pass out through the throat.<a href="#note_644" id="noteref_644" name="noteref_644"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">644</span></span></a> At the inauguration of a king in ancient India it was customary for the priests to strike him lightly on the back with sticks. <span class="tei tei-q">“By beating him with sticks,”</span> it was said, <span class="tei tei-q">“they guide him safely over judicial punishment; whence the king is exempt from punishment, because they guide him safely over judicial punishment.”</span><a href="#note_645" id="noteref_645" name="noteref_645"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">645</span></span></a> On the thirtieth of December the heathen of Harran used to receive three, five, or seven blows apiece from a priest with a tamarisk branch. After the beating had been duly administered the priest on behalf of the whole community prayed for long life, much offspring, power and glory over all peoples, and the restoration of their ancient kingdom.<a href="#note_646" id="noteref_646" name="noteref_646"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">646</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Sometimes, in the opinion of those who resort to it, the effect of a beating is not merely the negative one of dispelling demoniac or other baneful influences; it confers positive benefits by virtue of certain useful properties supposed to inhere in the instrument with which the beating is administered.<a href="#note_647" id="noteref_647" name="noteref_647"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">647</span></span></a> Thus among the Kai of German New Guinea, when a man wishes to make his banana shoots bear fruit quickly, he beats them with a stick cut from a banana-tree which has already borne fruit.<a href="#note_648" id="noteref_648" name="noteref_648"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">648</span></span></a> Here it is obvious that fruitfulness is believed to inhere in a stick cut from a fruitful tree and to be imparted by contact to the young banana plants. Similarly in New Caledonia a man will beat his taro plants lightly with a branch, saying as he does so, <span class="tei tei-q">“I beat this taro that it may grow,”</span> after which he plants the branch in the ground at the end of the field.<a href="#note_649" id="noteref_649" name="noteref_649"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">649</span></span></a> Among the Indians of Brazil at the mouth of the Amazon, when a man wishes to increase the size of his generative organ, he strikes it with the fruit of a white aquatic plant called an <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">aninga</span></span>, which grows luxuriantly on the banks of the river. The fruit, which is inedible, resembles a banana, and is clearly chosen for this purpose on account of its shape. The ceremony should be performed three days before or after the new moon.<a href="#note_650" id="noteref_650" name="noteref_650"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">650</span></span></a> In the county of Bekes, in Hungary, barren women are fertilized by being struck with a stick which has first been used to separate pairing dogs.<a href="#note_651" id="noteref_651" name="noteref_651"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">651</span></span></a> Here a fertilizing virtue is clearly supposed to be inherent in the stick and to be conveyed by contact to the women. The Toradjas of Central Celebes think that the plant <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Dracaena terminalis</span></span> has a strong soul, because when it is lopped, it soon grows up again. Hence when a man is ill, his friends will sometimes beat him on the crown of the head with <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Dracaena</span></span> leaves in order to strengthen his weak soul with the strong soul of the plant.<a href="#note_652" id="noteref_652" name="noteref_652"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">652</span></span></a> At Mowat in British New Guinea small boys are beaten lightly with sticks during December <span class="tei tei-q">“to make them grow strong and hardy.”</span><a href="#note_653" id="noteref_653" name="noteref_653"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">653</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Among the Arabs of Morocco the Great Feast, which is the annual sacrificial festival of Mohammedan peoples, is the occasion when men go about beating people with the kindly intention of healing or preventing sickness and benefiting the sufferers generally. In some tribes the operator is muffled in the bloody skins of sacrificed sheep, and he strikes everybody within reach of him with a flap of the skin or a foot of the sheep which dangles loose from his arm; sick people present themselves to him in order to receive the health-giving blows, and mothers bring their little children to him for the same purpose. Anybody whom he hits on the head will be free from headache. Nor does he confine his attention to people; he goes about striking the tents also, in order that they too may receive their share of the blessed influence (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ar" xml:lang="ar"><span style="font-style: italic">baraka</span></span>) that radiates like sunshine from a bloody sheepskin. From the costume which he wears the masker is known as the <span class="tei tei-q">“Lion with Sheepskins”</span>; and he himself participates in the blessings which he diffuses so liberally around him. Hence in at least one tribe he is generally a person who suffers from some illness, because he expects to be healed by the magic virtue or holiness of the bloody skins.<a href="#note_654" id="noteref_654" name="noteref_654"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">654</span></span></a> Similarly, as we shall see presently, in ancient Mexico the men who masqueraded in the skins of the human victims were commonly persons who suffered from skin disease, because they thought that the bleeding skin of a man who had been killed in the character of a god must surely possess a sovereign virtue for the healing of disease.<a href="#note_655" id="noteref_655" name="noteref_655"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">655</span></span></a> In Morocco the skin-clad mummer sometimes operates with sticks instead of a flap of the skin, and sometimes the skins in which he is muffled are those of goats instead of sheep, but in all cases the effect, or at least the intention, is probably the same.<a href="#note_656" id="noteref_656" name="noteref_656"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">656</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In some parts of Eastern and Central Europe a similar custom is very commonly observed in spring. On the first of March the Albanians strike men and beast with cornel branches, believing that this is very good for their health.<a href="#note_657" id="noteref_657" name="noteref_657"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">657</span></span></a> In March the Greek peasants of Cos switch their cattle, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is March, and up with your tail!”</span> They think that the ceremony benefits the animals, and brings good luck. It is never observed at any other time of the year.<a href="#note_658" id="noteref_658" name="noteref_658"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">658</span></span></a> In some parts of Mecklenburg it is customary to beat the cattle before sunrise on the morning of Good Friday with rods of buckthorn, which are afterwards concealed in some secret place where neither sun nor moon can shine on them. The belief is that though the blows light upon the animals, the pain of them is felt by the witches who are riding the beasts.<a href="#note_659" id="noteref_659" name="noteref_659"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">659</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Iserlohn, in Westphalia, the herdsman rises at peep of dawn on May morning, climbs a hill, and cuts down the young rowan-tree which is the first to catch the beams of the rising sun. With this he returns to the farm-yard. The heifer which the farmer desires to <span class="tei tei-q">“quicken”</span> is then led to the dunghill, and the herdsman strikes it over the hind-quarters, the haunches, and the udders with a branch of the rowan-tree, saying,</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Quick, quick, quick!</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Bring milk into the dugs.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The sap is in the birches.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The heifer receives a name.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Quick, quick, quick!</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Bring milk into the dugs.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The sap comes in the beeches,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The leaf comes on the oak.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Quick, quick, quick!</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Bring milk into the dugs.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">In the name of the sainted Greta,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Gold-flower shall be thy name,</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>and so on.<a href="#note_660" id="noteref_660" name="noteref_660"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">660</span></span></a> The intention of the ceremony appears to be to make sure that the heifer shall in due time yield a plentiful supply of milk; and this is perhaps supposed to be brought about by driving away the witches, who are particularly apt, as we have seen,<a href="#note_661" id="noteref_661" name="noteref_661"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">661</span></span></a> to rob the cows of their milk on the morning of May Day. Certainly in the north-east of Scotland pieces of rowan-tree and woodbine used to be placed over the doors of the byres on May Day to keep the witches from the cows; sometimes a single rod of rowan, covered with notches, was found to answer the purpose. An even more effectual guard against witchcraft was to tie a small cross of rowan-wood by a scarlet thread to each beast's tail; hence people said,</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Rawn-tree in red-threed</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Pits the witches t' their speed.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_662" id="noteref_662" name="noteref_662">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">662</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Germany also the rowan-tree is a protection against witchcraft;<a href="#note_663" id="noteref_663" name="noteref_663"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">663</span></span></a> and Norwegian sailors and fishermen carry a piece of it in their boats for good luck.<a href="#note_664" id="noteref_664" name="noteref_664"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">664</span></span></a> Thus the benefit to young cows of beating them with rowan appears to be not so much the positive one of pouring milk into their udders, as merely the negative one of averting evil influence; and the same may perhaps be said of most of the beatings with which we are here concerned.</p>
					<p>On Good Friday and the two previous days people in Croatia and Slavonia take rods with them to church, and when the service is over they beat each other <span class="tei tei-q">“fresh and healthy.”</span><a href="#note_665" id="noteref_665" name="noteref_665"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">665</span></span></a> In some parts of Russia people returning from the church on Palm Sunday beat the children and servants who have stayed at home with palm branches, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sickness into the forest, health into the bones.”</span><a href="#note_666" id="noteref_666" name="noteref_666"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">666</span></span></a> A similar custom is widely known under the name of <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Schmeckostern</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“Easter Smacks”</span> in some parts of Germany and Austria. The regions in which the practice prevails are for the most part districts in which the people either are or once were predominantly of Slavonic blood, such as East and West Prussia, Voigtland, Silesia, Bohemia, and Moravia. While the German population call the custom <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">Schmeckostern</span></span>, the Slavonic inhabitants give it, according to their particular language or dialect, a variety of names which signify to beat or scourge. It is usually observed on Easter Monday, less frequently on Easter Saturday or Easter Sunday. Troops of boys or lads go from house to house on the morning of Easter Monday beating every girl or woman whom they meet; they even make their way into the bedrooms, and if they find any girls or women still abed, they compel them with blows to get up. Even grown-up men indulge themselves in the pastime of going to the houses of friends and relations to inflict the <span class="tei tei-q">“Easter Smacks.”</span> In some places, for example in the Leobschütz district of Silesia, the boys and men further claim and exercise the right of drenching all the girls and women with water on Easter Monday; and for this purpose they generally go about armed with squirts, which are not always charged with eau de Cologne. Next day, Easter Tuesday, the women have the right to retaliate on the men; however, they do not as a rule go about the streets but confine their operations to their own houses, beating and chasing from their beds any lads or men they can find lying in them. Children are less discriminating in their <span class="tei tei-q">“Easter Smacks,”</span> which they bestow impartially on parents and relations, friends and strangers, without observing the subtle distinction of sex. In many places it is only the women who are privileged to receive the smacks. The instrument with which the beating is administered is in some districts, such as Lithuania, Samland, and Neumark, a twig or branch of birch on which the fresh green leaves have just sprouted. If the birch-trees have not budded in time, it is customary to keep the rods in pickle for days or even weeks, nursing them tenderly in warm water; and if that measure also fails, they are heated in the stove-pipe. But more commonly the instrument of torture is a branch of willow with catkins on it, which has also been nursed in warm water or the chimney so as to be ripe for execution on Easter Monday. A number of these birch or willow twigs are usually tied together into a switch, and ornamented with motley ribbons and pieces of silk paper, so that they present the appearance of a nosegay; indeed, in northern Bohemia spring flowers form part of the decoration. In some places, particularly in Silesia and Moravia, pieces of licorice root are substituted for willow twigs; or again in the vine-growing districts of Bohemia vine-branches are used for the same purpose. Sometimes a scourge made of leather straps of various colours takes the place of a green bough. The blows are commonly inflicted on the hands and feet; and in some places, particularly in Bohemia, the victims are expected to reward their tormentors with a present of red Easter eggs; nay sometimes a woman is bound to give an egg for every blow she receives. In the afternoon the lads carry their eggs to high ground and let them roll down the slope; he whose egg reaches the bottom first, wins all the rest. The beating is supposed to bring good luck to the beaten, or to warrant them against flies and vermin during the summer, or to save them from pains in their back throughout the whole year. At Gilgenburg in Masuren the rods or bundles of twigs are afterwards laid by and used to drive the cattle out to pasture for the first time after their winter confinement.<a href="#note_667" id="noteref_667" name="noteref_667"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">667</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In some parts of Germany and Austria a custom like that of <span class="tei tei-q">“Easter Smacks”</span> is observed at the Christmas holidays, especially on Holy Innocents' Day, the twenty-eighth of December. Young men and women beat each other mutually, but on different days, with branches of fresh green, whether birch, willow, or fir. Thus, for example, among the Germans of western Bohemia it is customary on St. Barbara's Day (the fourth of December) to cut twigs or branches of birch and to steep them in water in order that they may put out leaves or buds. They are afterwards used by each sex to beat the other on subsequent days of the Christmas holidays. In some villages branches of willow or cherry-trees or rosemary are employed for the same purpose. With these green boughs, sometimes tied in bundles with red or green ribbons, the young men go about beating the young women on the morning of St. Stephen's Day (the twenty-sixth of December) and also on Holy Innocents' Day (the twenty-eighth of December). The beating is inflicted on the hands, feet, and face; and in Neugramatin it is said that she who is not thus beaten with fresh green will not herself be fresh and green. As the blows descend, the young men recite verses importing that the beating is administered as a compliment and in order to benefit the health of the victim. For the service which they thus render the damsels they are rewarded by them with cakes, brandy, or money. Early in the morning of New Year's Day the lasses pay off the lads in the same kind.<a href="#note_668" id="noteref_668" name="noteref_668"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">668</span></span></a> A similar custom is also observed in central and south-west Germany, especially in Voigtland. Thus in Voigtland and the whole of the Saxon Erz-gebirge the lads beat the lasses and women on the second day of the Christmas holidays with something green, such as rosemary or juniper; and if possible the beating is inflicted on the women as they lie in bed. As they beat them, the lads say</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fresh and green! Pretty and fine!</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Gingerbread and brandy-wine!</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The last words refer to the present of gingerbread and brandy which the lads expect to receive from the lasses for the trouble of thrashing them. Next day the lasses and women retaliate on the lads and men.<a href="#note_669" id="noteref_669" name="noteref_669"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">669</span></span></a> In Thüringen on Holy Innocents' Day (the twenty-eighth of December) children armed with rods and green boughs go about the streets beating passers-by and demanding a present in return; they even make their way into the houses and beat the maid-servants. In Orlagau the custom is called <span class="tei tei-q">“whipping with fresh green.”</span> On the second day of the Christmas holidays the girls go to their parents, godparents, relations, and friends, and beat them with fresh green branches of fir; next day the boys and lads do the same. The words spoken while the beating is being administered are <span class="tei tei-q">“Good morning! fresh green! Long life! You must give us a bright thaler,”</span> and so on.<a href="#note_670" id="noteref_670" name="noteref_670"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">670</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In these European customs the intention of beating persons, especially of the other sex, with fresh green leaves appears unquestionably to be the beneficent one of renewing their life and vigour, whether the purpose is supposed to be accomplished directly and positively by imparting the vital energy of the fresh green to the persons, or negatively and indirectly by dispelling any injurious influences, such as the machinations of witches and demons, by which the persons may be supposed to be beset. The application of the blows by the one sex to the other, especially by young men to young women, suggests that the beating is or was originally intended above all to stimulate the reproductive powers of the men or women who received it; and the pains taken to ensure that the branches with which the strokes are given should have budded or blossomed out just before their services are wanted speak strongly in favour of the view that in these customs we have a deliberate attempt to transfuse a store of vital energy from the vegetable to the animal world.</p>
					<p>These analogies, accordingly, support the interpretation which, following my predecessors W. Mannhardt and Mr. W. R. Paton, I have given of the beating inflicted on the human victims at the Greek harvest festival of the Thargelia. That beating, being administered to the generative organs of the victims by fresh green plants and branches, is most naturally explained as a charm to increase the reproductive energies of the men or women either by communicating to them the fruitfulness of the plants and branches, or by ridding them of maleficent influences; and this interpretation is confirmed by the observation that the two victims represented the two sexes, one of them standing for the men in general and the other for the women. The season of the year when the ceremony was performed, namely the time of the corn harvest, tallies well with the theory that the rite had an agricultural significance. Further, that it was above all intended to fertilize the fig-trees is strongly suggested by the strings of black and white figs which were hung round the necks of the victims, as well as by the blows which were given their genital organs with the branches of a wild fig-tree; since this procedure closely resembles the procedure which ancient and modern husbandmen in Greek lands have regularly resorted to for the purpose of actually fertilizing their fig-trees. When we remember what an important part the artificial fertilization of the date palm-tree appears to have played of old not only in the husbandry but in the religion of Mesopotamia,<a href="#note_671" id="noteref_671" name="noteref_671"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">671</span></span></a> there seems no reason to doubt that the artificial fertilization of the fig-tree may in like manner have vindicated for itself a place in the solemn ritual of Greek religion.</p>
					<p>If these considerations are just, we must apparently conclude that while the human victims at the Thargelia certainly appear in later classical times to have figured chiefly as public scapegoats, who carried away with them the sins, misfortunes, and sorrows of the whole people, at an earlier time they may have been looked on as embodiments of vegetation, perhaps of the corn but particularly of the fig-trees; and that the beating which they received and the death which they died were intended primarily to brace and refresh the powers of vegetation then beginning to droop and languish under the torrid heat of the Greek summer.</p>
					<p>The view here taken of the Greek scapegoat, if it is correct, obviates an objection which might otherwise be brought against the main argument of this book. To the theory that the priest of Aricia was slain as a representative of the spirit of the grove,<a href="#note_672" id="noteref_672" name="noteref_672"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">672</span></span></a> it might have been objected that such a custom has no analogy in classical antiquity. But reasons have now been given for believing that the human being periodically and occasionally slain by the Asiatic Greeks was regularly treated as an embodiment of a divinity of vegetation. Probably the persons whom the Athenians kept to be sacrificed were similarly treated as divine. That they were social outcasts did not matter. On the primitive view a man is not chosen to be the mouth-piece or embodiment of a god on account of his high moral qualities or social rank. The divine afflatus descends equally on the good and the bad, the lofty and the lowly. If then the civilized Greeks of Asia and Athens habitually sacrificed men whom they regarded as incarnate gods, there can be no inherent improbability in the supposition that at the dawn of history a similar custom was observed by the semi-barbarous Latins in the Arician Grove.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
