<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc27" name="toc27"/>
				<a id="pdf28" name="pdf28"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter IV. The Supply Of Kings.</span>
				</h1>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Stories of the type of Beauty and the Beast are not mere fictions, but rest on a real basis of belief and custom. Similarly the legend of kings who were sacrificed after a reign of a single day has its analogy in actual custom. Such stories indicate that the supply of kings may have been maintained by compelling men to accept the fatal sovereignty.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Tales of the foregoing sort might be dismissed as fictions designed to amuse a leisure hour, were it not for their remarkable agreement with beliefs and customs which, as we have seen, still exist, or are known to have existed in former times. That agreement can hardly be accidental. We seem to be justified, therefore, in assuming that stories of the kind really rest on a basis of facts, however much these facts may have been distorted or magnified in passing through the mind of the story-teller, who is naturally more concerned to amuse than instruct his hearers. Even the legend of a line of kings of whom each reigned for a single day, and was sacrificed at night for the good of the people, will hardly seem incredible when we remember that to this day a kingdom is held on a similar tenure in west Africa, though under modern conditions the throne stands vacant.<a href="#note_376" id="noteref_376" name="noteref_376"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">376</span></span></a> And while it would be vain to rely on such stories for exact historical details, yet they may help us in a general way to understand the practical working of an institution which to civilised men seems at first sight to belong to the cloudland of fancy rather than to the sober reality of the workaday world. Remark, for example, how in these stories the supply of kings is maintained. In the Indian tradition all the men of the city are put on a list, and each of them, when his turn comes, is forced to reign for a day and to die the death. It is not left to his choice to decide whether he will accept the fatal sovereignty or not. In the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">High History of the Holy Grail</span></span> the mode of filling the vacant <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page135">[pg 135]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg135" name="Pg135"/> throne is different. A stranger, not a citizen, is seized and compelled to accept office. In the end, no doubt, the dwarf volunteers to be king, thus saving Lancelot's life; but the narrative plainly implies that if a substitute had not thus been found, Lancelot would have been obliged, whether he would or not, to wear the crown and to perish in the fire.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Our conceptions of the primitive kingship are apt to be coloured and falsified by ideas borrowed from the very different monarchies of modern Europe.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In thus representing the succession to a throne as compulsory, the stories may well preserve a reminiscence of a real custom. To us, indeed, who draw our ideas of kingship from the hereditary and highly privileged monarchies of civilised Europe, the notion of thrusting the crown upon reluctant strangers or common citizens of the lowest rank is apt to appear fantastic and absurd. But that is merely because we fail to realise how widely the modern type of kingship has diverged from the ancient pattern. In early times the duties of sovereignty are more conspicuous than its privileges. At a certain stage of development the chief or king is rather the minister or servant than the ruler of his people. The sacred functions which he is expected to discharge are deemed essential to the welfare, and even the existence, of the community, and at any cost some one must be found to perform them. Yet the burdens and restrictions of all sorts incidental to the early kingship are such that not merely in popular tales, but in actual practice, compulsion has sometimes been found necessary to fill vacancies, while elsewhere the lack of candidates has caused the office to fall into abeyance, or even to be abolished altogether.<a href="#note_377" id="noteref_377" name="noteref_377"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">377</span></span></a> And where death stared the luckless monarch in the face at the end of a brief reign of a few months or days, we need not wonder that gaols had to be swept and the dregs of society raked to find a king.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">In other races and other ages many men may have been willing to accept a kingdom on condition of being killed at the end of a short reign. Various causes have contributed to intensify the fear of death in modern Europe.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Yet we should doubtless err if we supposed that under such hard conditions men could never be found ready and even eager to accept the sovereignty. A variety of causes has led the modern nations of western Europe to set on human life—their own life and that of others—a higher value than is put upon it by many other races. The result is a fear of death which is certainly not shared in the same <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page136">[pg 136]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg136" name="Pg136"/> degree of intensity by some peoples whom we in our self-complacency are accustomed to regard as our inferiors. Among the causes which thus tend to make us cowards may be numbered the spread of luxury and the doctrines of a gloomy theology, which by proclaiming the eternal damnation and excruciating torments of the vast majority of mankind has added incalculably to the dread and horror of death. The growth of humaner sentiments, which seldom fails to effect a corresponding amelioration in the character even of the gods, has indeed led many Protestant divines of late years to temper the rigour of the divine justice with a large infusion of mercy by relegating the fires of hell to a decent obscurity or even extinguishing them altogether. But these lurid flames appear to blaze as fiercely as ever in the more conservative theology of the Catholic Church.<a href="#note_378" id="noteref_378" name="noteref_378"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">378</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Evidence of the comparative indifference to death displayed by other races. Absence of the fear of death in India and Annam.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">It would be easy to accumulate evidence of the indifference or apathy exhibited in presence of death by races whom we commonly brand as lower. A few examples must here suffice. Speaking of the natives of India an English writer observes: <span class="tei tei-q">“We place the highest value on life, while they, being blessed with a comfortable fatalism, which assumes that each man's destiny is written on his forehead in invisible characters, and being besides untroubled with any doubts or thoughts as to the nature of their reception in the next world, take matters of life and death a great deal more unconcernedly, and, compared with our ideas, they may be said to present an almost apathetic indifference on these subjects.”</span><a href="#note_379" id="noteref_379" name="noteref_379"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">379</span></span></a> To the same effect another English writer remarks that <span class="tei tei-q">“the absence of that fear of death, which is so powerful in the hearts of civilised men, is the most remarkable trait in the Hindu character.”</span><a href="#note_380" id="noteref_380" name="noteref_380"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">380</span></span></a> Among the natives of Annam, according to a Catholic missionary, <span class="tei tei-q">“the subject of death has nothing alarming for anybody. In presence of a sick man people will speak of his approaching end <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page137">[pg 137]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg137" name="Pg137"/> and of his funeral as readily as of anything else. Hence we never need to take the least verbal precaution in warning the sick to prepare themselves to receive the last sacraments. Some time ago I was summoned to a neophyte whose death, though certain, was still distant. On entering the house I found a woman seated at his bedside sewing the mourning dresses of the family. Moreover, the carpenter was fitting together the boards of the coffin quite close to the door of the house, so that the dying man could observe the whole proceeding from his bed. The worthy man superintended personally all these details and gave directions for each of the operations. He even had for his pillow part of the mourning costume which was already finished. I could tell you a host of anecdotes of the same sort.”</span> Among these people it is a mark of filial piety to present a father or mother with a coffin; the presentation is the occasion of a family festival to which all friends are invited. Pupils display their respect for their masters in the same fashion. Bishop Masson, whose letter I have just quoted, was himself presented with a fine coffin by some of his converts as a New Year gift and a token of their respect and affection; they invited his attention particularly to the quality of the wood and the beauty of the workmanship.<a href="#note_381" id="noteref_381" name="noteref_381"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">381</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Absence of the fear of death among the American Indians.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">With regard to the North American Indians a writer who knew them well has said that among them <span class="tei tei-q">“the idea of immortality is strongly dwelt upon. It is not spoken of as a supposition or a mere belief, not fixed. It is regarded as an actuality,—as something known and approved by the judgment of the nation. During the whole period of my residence and travels in the Indian country, I never knew and never heard of an Indian who did not believe in it, and in the reappearance of the body in a future state. However mistaken they are on the subject of accountabilities for acts done in the present life, no small part of their entire mythology, and the belief that sustains the man in his vicissitudes and wanderings here, arises from the anticipation of ease and enjoyment in a future condition, after the soul has left the body. The resignation, nay, the alacrity with which an <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page138">[pg 138]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg138" name="Pg138"/> Indian frequently lies down and surrenders life, is to be ascribed to this prevalent belief. He does not fear to go to a land which, all his life long, he has heard abounds in rewards without punishments.”</span><a href="#note_382" id="noteref_382" name="noteref_382"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">382</span></span></a> Another traveller, who saw much of the South American Indians, asserts that they surpass the beasts in their insensibility to hardship and pain, never complaining in sickness nor even when they are being killed, and exhibiting in their last moments an apathetic indifference untroubled by any misgiving as to the future.<a href="#note_383" id="noteref_383" name="noteref_383"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">383</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Apathy of savages under sentence of death.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Wholesale butcheries of human beings were perpetrated till lately in the name of religion in the west African kingdom of Dahomey. As to the behaviour of the victims we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“almost invariably, those doomed to die exhibit the greatest coolness and unconcern. The natural dread of death which the instinct of self-preservation has implanted in every breast, often leads persons who are liable to be seized for immolation to endeavour to escape; but once they are seized and bound, they resign themselves to their fate with the greatest apathy. This is partly due to the less delicate nervous system of the negro; but one reason, and that not the least, is that they have nothing to fear. As has been said, they have but to undergo a surgical operation and a change of place of residence; there is no uncertain future to be faced, and, above all, there is an entire absence of that notion of a place of terrible punishment which makes so many Europeans cowards when face to face with death.”</span><a href="#note_384" id="noteref_384" name="noteref_384"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">384</span></span></a> One of the earliest European settlers on the coast of Brazil has remarked on the indifference exhibited by the Indian prisoners who were about to be massacred by their enemies. He conversed with the captives, men young, strong, and handsome. To his question whether they did not fear the death that was so near and so appalling, they replied with laughter and mockery. When he spoke of ransoming them from their foes, they jeered at the cowardice of Europeans.<a href="#note_385" id="noteref_385" name="noteref_385"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">385</span></span></a> The <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page139">[pg 139]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg139" name="Pg139"/> Khonds of India practised an extensive system of human sacrifice, of which we shall hear more in the sequel. The victims, known as Meriahs, were kept for years to be sacrificed, and their manner of death was peculiarly horrible, since they were hacked to pieces or slowly roasted alive. Yet when these destined victims were rescued by the English officers who were engaged in putting down the custom, they generally availed themselves of any opportunity to escape from their deliverers and returned to their fate.<a href="#note_386" id="noteref_386" name="noteref_386"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">386</span></span></a> In Uganda there were formerly many sacrificial places where human victims used to be slaughtered or burned to death, sometimes in hundreds, from motives of superstition. <span class="tei tei-q">“Those who have taken part in these executions bear witness how seldom a victim, whether man or woman, raised his voice to protest or appeal against the treatment meted out to him. The victims went to death (so they thought) to save their country and race from some calamity, and they laid down their lives without a murmur or a struggle.”</span><a href="#note_387" id="noteref_387" name="noteref_387"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">387</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Further, men of other races often sacrifice their lives voluntarily for reasons which seem to us wholly inadequate. Thus people have freely allowed themselves to be killed in order to accompany their dead ruler to the other world.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But it is not merely that men of other races and other religions submit to inevitable death with an equanimity which modern Europeans in general cannot match; they often actually seek and find it for reasons which seem to us wholly inadequate. The motives which lead them to sacrifice their lives are very various. Among them religious fanaticism has probably been one of the commonest, and in the preceding pages we have met with many instances of voluntary deaths incurred under its powerful impulse.<a href="#note_388" id="noteref_388" name="noteref_388"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">388</span></span></a> But more secular motives, such as loyalty, revenge, and an excessive sensibility on the point of honour, have also driven multitudes to throw away their lives with a levity which may strike the average modern Englishman as bordering on insanity. It may be well to illustrate this comparative indifference to death by a few miscellaneous examples drawn from different races. Thus, when the king of Benin <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page140">[pg 140]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg140" name="Pg140"/> died and was about to be lowered into the earth, his favourites and servants used to compete with each other for the privilege of being buried alive with his body in order that they might attend and minister to him in the other world. After the dispute was settled and the tomb had closed over the dead and the living, sentinels were set to watch it day and night. Next day the sepulchre would be opened and some one would call down to the entombed men to know what they were doing and whether any of them had gone to serve the king. The answer was commonly, <span class="tei tei-q">“No, not yet.”</span> The third day the same question would be put, and a voice would reply that so-and-so had gone to join his Majesty. The first to die was deemed the happiest. In four or five days when no answer came up to the question, and all was silent in the grave, the heir to the throne was informed, and he signalised his accession by kindling a fire on the tomb, roasting flesh at it, and distributing the meat to the people.<a href="#note_389" id="noteref_389" name="noteref_389"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">389</span></span></a> The daughter of a Mbaya chief in South America, having been happily baptized at the very point of death, was accorded Christian burial in the church by the Jesuit missionary who had rescued her like a brand from the burning. But an old heathen woman of the tribe took it sadly to heart that her chief's daughter should not be honoured with the usual human sacrifices. So, drawing an Indian aside, she implored him to be so kind as to knock her on the head, that she might go and serve her young mistress in the Land of Souls. The savage obligingly complied with her request, and the whole horde begged the missionary that her body might be buried with that of the chief's daughter. The Jesuit sternly refused. He informed them that the girl was now with the angels, and stood in need of no such attendant. As for the old woman, he observed grimly that she had gone to a very different place and would move in a very different circle of society.<a href="#note_390" id="noteref_390" name="noteref_390"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">390</span></span></a> When Otho committed suicide after the battle of Bedriacum, some of his soldiers slew themselves at his pyre, and their example was afterwards followed by many of their <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page141">[pg 141]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg141" name="Pg141"/> comrades in the armies which had marched with Otho to meet Vitellius; their motive was not fear of the conqueror, but purely loyalty and devotion to their emperor.<a href="#note_391" id="noteref_391" name="noteref_391"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">391</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">In the East, persons sometimes commit suicide in order to avenge themselves on their enemies. Law of retaliation in a robber caste of southern India.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In the East that indifference to human life which seems so strange to the Western mind often takes a peculiar form. A man will sometimes kill himself merely in order to be revenged on his foe, believing that his ghost will haunt and torment the survivor, or expecting that punishment of some sort will overtake the wretch who drove him to this extreme step.<a href="#note_392" id="noteref_392" name="noteref_392"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">392</span></span></a> Among some peoples etiquette requires that if a man commits suicide for this purpose, his enemy should at once follow his example. To take a single example. There is a caste of robbers in southern India among whom <span class="tei tei-q">“the law of retaliation prevails in all its rigour. If a quarrel takes place, and somebody tears out his own eye or kills himself, his adversary must do the same either to himself or to one of his relations. The women carry this barbarity still further. For a slight affront put on them, a sharp word said to them, they will go and smash their head against the door of her who offended them, and the latter is obliged immediately to do the same. If a woman poisons herself by drinking the juice of a poisonous herb, the other woman who drove her to this violent death must poison herself likewise; else her house will be burned, her cattle carried off, and injuries of all kinds done her until satisfaction is given. They extend this cruelty even to their own children. Not long ago, a few steps from the church in which I have the honour to write to you, two of these barbarians having quarrelled, one of them ran to his house, took from it a child of about four years, and crushed its head between two stones in the presence of his enemy. The latter, without exhibiting any emotion, took his nine-years' old daughter, and, plunging a dagger into her breast, said, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Your child was only four years old, mine was nine years old. Give me a victim to equal her.’</span> <span class="tei tei-q">‘Certainly,’</span> replied the other, and seeing at his side his eldest son, who was ready to be married, he stabbed him four or five times with his dagger; <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page142">[pg 142]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg142" name="Pg142"/> and, not content with shedding the blood of his two sons, he killed his wife too, in order to oblige his enemy to murder his wife in like manner. Lastly, a little girl and a baby at the breast had also their throats cut, so that in a single day seven persons were sacrificed to the vengeance of two bloodthirsty men, more cruel than the most ferocious brutes. I have actually in my church a young man who sought refuge among us, wounded by a spear-thrust which his father inflicted on him in order to kill him and thus oblige his foe to slay his own son in like manner. The barbarian had already stabbed two of his children on other occasions for the same purpose. Such atrocious examples will seem to you to partake more of fable than of truth; but believe me that far from exaggerating, I could produce many others not less tragical.”</span><a href="#note_393" id="noteref_393" name="noteref_393"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">393</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Contempt of death exhibited in antiquity by the Thracians and the Gauls.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The same contempt of death which many races have exhibited in modern times was displayed in antiquity by the hardy natives of Europe before Christianity had painted the world beyond the grave in colours at which even their bold spirits quailed. Thus, for example, at their banquets the rude Thracians used to suspend a halter over a movable stone and cast lots among themselves. The man on whom the lot fell mounted the stone with a scimitar in his hand and thrust his head into the noose. A comrade then rolled the stone from under him, and while he did so the other attempted to sever the rope with his scimitar. If he succeeded he dropped to the ground and was saved; if he failed, he was hanged, and his dying struggles were greeted with peals of laughter by his fellows, who regarded the whole thing as a capital joke.<a href="#note_394" id="noteref_394" name="noteref_394"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">394</span></span></a> The Greek traveller Posidonius, who visited Gaul early in the first century before our era, records that among the Celts men were to be found who for a sum of money or a number of jars of wine, which they distributed among their kinsmen or friends, would allow themselves to be publicly slaughtered in a theatre. They <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page143">[pg 143]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg143" name="Pg143"/> lay down on their backs upon a shield and a man came and cut their throats with a sword.<a href="#note_395" id="noteref_395" name="noteref_395"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">395</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">In ancient Rome there were men willing to be beheaded for a sum of five</span>
						<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la">
							<span style="font-size: 80%; font-style: italic">minae</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 80%">.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A Greek author, Euphorion of Chalcis, who lived in the age when the eyes of all the world were turned on the great conflict between Rome and Carthage for the mastery of the Mediterranean, tells us that at Rome it was customary to advertise for men who would consent to be beheaded with an axe in consideration of receiving a sum of five <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">minae</span></span>, or about twenty pounds of our money, to be paid after their death to their heirs. Apparently there was no lack of applicants for this hard-earned bounty; for we are informed that several candidates would often compete for the privilege, each of them arguing that he had the best right to be cudgelled to death.<a href="#note_396" id="noteref_396" name="noteref_396"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">396</span></span></a> Why were these men invited to be beheaded for twenty pounds a piece? and why in response to the invitation did they gratuitously, as it would seem, express their readiness to suffer a much more painful death than simple decapitation? The reasons are not stated by Euphorion in the brief extract quoted from his work by Athenaeus, the Greek writer who has also preserved for us the testimony of Posidonius to the Gallic recklessness of life. But the connexion in which Athenaeus cites both these passages suggests that the intention of the Roman as of the Gallic practice was merely to minister to the brutal pleasure of the spectators; for he inserts his account of the customs in a dissertation on banquets, and he had just before described how hired ruffians fought and butchered each other at Roman dinner-parties for the amusement of the tipsy guests.<a href="#note_397" id="noteref_397" name="noteref_397"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">397</span></span></a> Or perhaps the men were wanted to be slaughtered at funerals, for we know that at Rome a custom formerly prevailed of sacrificing human beings at the tomb: the victims were commonly captives or slaves,<a href="#note_398" id="noteref_398" name="noteref_398"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">398</span></span></a> but they may sometimes have <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page144">[pg 144]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg144" name="Pg144"/> been obtained by advertisement from among the class of needy freemen. Such wretches in bidding against each other may have pleaded as a reason for giving them the preference that they really deserved for their crimes to die a slow and painful death under the cudgel of the executioner. This explanation of the custom, which I owe to my friend Mr. W. Wyse, is perhaps the most probable. But it is also possible, though the language of Euphorion does not lend itself so well to this interpretation, that a cudgelling preceded decapitation as part of the bargain. If that was so, it would seem that the men were wanted to die as substitutes for condemned criminals; for in old Rome capital punishment was regularly inflicted in this fashion, the malefactors being tied up to a post and scourged with rods before they were beheaded with an axe.<a href="#note_399" id="noteref_399" name="noteref_399"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">399</span></span></a> There is nothing improbable in the view that persons could be hired to suffer the extreme penalty of the law instead of the real culprits. We shall see that a voluntary substitution of the same sort is reported on apparently good authority to be still occasionally practised in China. However, it is immaterial to our purpose whether these men perished to save others, to adorn a funeral, or merely to gratify the Roman lust for blood. The one thing that concerns us is that in the great age of Rome there were to be found Romans willing, nay, eager to barter their lives for a paltry sum of money of which they were not even to have the enjoyment. No wonder that men made of that stuff founded a great empire, and spread the terror of the Roman arms from the Grampians to the tropics.<a href="#note_400" id="noteref_400" name="noteref_400"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">400</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Chinese indifference to death.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The comparative indifference with which the Chinese regard their lives is attested by the readiness with which they commit suicide on grounds which often seem to the European extremely trifling.<a href="#note_401" id="noteref_401" name="noteref_401"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">401</span></span></a> A still more striking proof <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page145">[pg 145]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg145" name="Pg145"/> of their apathy in this respect is furnished by the readiness with which in China a man can be induced to suffer death for a sum of money to be paid to his relatives. Thus, for example, <span class="tei tei-q">“one of the most wealthy of the aboriginal tribes, called Shurii-Kia-Miau, is remarkable for the practice of a singular and revolting religious ceremony. The people possess a large temple, in which is an idol in the form of a dog. They resort to this shrine on a certain day every year to worship. At this annual religious festival it is, I believe, customary for the wealthy members of the tribe to entertain their poorer brethren at a banquet given in honour of one who has agreed, for a sum of money paid to his family, to allow himself to be offered as a sacrifice on the altar of the dog idol. At the end of the banquet the victim, having drunk wine freely, is put to death before the idol. This people believe that, were they to neglect this rite, they would be visited with pestilence, famine, or the sword.”</span><a href="#note_402" id="noteref_402" name="noteref_402"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">402</span></span></a> Further, it is said that in China a man condemned to death can procure a substitute, who, for a small sum, will voluntarily consent to be executed in his stead. The money goes to the substitute's kinsfolk, and since to increase the family prosperity at the expense of personal suffering is regarded by the Chinese as an act of the highest virtue, there is reported to be, just as there used to be in ancient Rome, quite a competition among the candidates for death. Such a substitution is even recognised by the Chinese authorities, except in the case of certain grave crimes, as for instance parricide. The local mandarin is probably not averse to the arrangement, for he is said to make a pecuniary profit by the transaction, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page146">[pg 146]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg146" name="Pg146"/> engaging a substitute for a less sum than he received from the condemned man, and pocketing the difference.<a href="#note_403" id="noteref_403" name="noteref_403"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">403</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">We must not judge of all men's love of life by our own.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The foregoing evidence may suffice to convince us that we should commit a grievous error were we to judge all men's love of life by our own, and to assume that others cannot hold cheap what we count so dear. We shall never understand the long course of human history if we persist in measuring mankind in all ages and in all countries by the standard, perhaps excellent but certainly narrow, of the modern English middle class with their love of material comfort and <span class="tei tei-q">“their passionate, absorbing, almost bloodthirsty clinging to life.”</span> That class, of which I may say, in the words of Matthew Arnold, that I am myself a feeble unit, doubtless possesses many estimable qualities, but among them can hardly be reckoned the rare and delicate gift of historical imagination, the power of entering into the thoughts and feelings of men of other ages and other countries, of conceiving that they may regulate their life by principles which do not square with ours, and may throw it away for objects which to us might seem ridiculously inadequate.<a href="#note_404" id="noteref_404" name="noteref_404"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">404</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Hence it is probable that in some races and at some periods of history it would be easy to find men willing to accept a kingdom on condition of being killed at the end of a short reign.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">To return, therefore, to the point from which we started, we may safely assume that in some races, and at some periods of history, though certainly not in the well-to-do classes of England to-day, it might be easy to find men who would willingly accept a kingdom with the certainty of being put to death after a reign of a year or less. Where men are ready, as they have been in Gaul, in Rome, and in China, to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page147">[pg 147]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg147" name="Pg147"/> yield up their lives at once for a paltry sum of which they are themselves to reap no benefit, would they not be willing to purchase at the same price a year's tenure of a throne? Among people of that sort the difficulty would probably be not so much to find a candidate for the crown as to decide between the conflicting claims of a multitude of competitors. In point of fact we have heard of a Shilluk clamouring to be made king on condition of being killed at the end of a brief reign of a single day, and we have read how in Malabar a crowd scrambled for the bloody head which entitled the lucky man who caught it to be decapitated after five years of unlimited enjoyment, and how at Calicut many men used to rush cheerfully on death, not for a kingship of a year, or even of an hour, but merely for the honour of displaying their valour in a fruitless attack on the king.<a href="#note_405" id="noteref_405" name="noteref_405"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">405</span></span></a></p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page148">[pg 148]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg148" name="Pg148"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
