<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter VII. Lityerses.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. Songs of the Corn Reapers.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>In the preceding pages an attempt has been made to shew that in the Corn-mother and Harvest-maiden of Northern Europe we have the prototypes of Demeter and Persephone. But an essential feature is still wanting to complete the resemblance. A leading incident in the Greek myth is the death and resurrection of Persephone; it is this incident which, coupled with the nature of the goddess as a deity of vegetation, links the myth with the cults of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, and Dionysus; and it is in virtue of this incident that the myth finds a place in our discussion of the Dying God. It remains, therefore, to see whether the conception of the annual death and resurrection of a god, which figures so prominently in these great Greek and Oriental worships, has not also its origin or its analogy in the rustic rites observed by reapers and vine-dressers amongst the corn-shocks and the vines.</p>
					<p>Our general ignorance of the popular superstitions and customs of the ancients has already been confessed. But the obscurity which thus hangs over the first beginnings of ancient religion is fortunately dissipated to some extent in the present case. The worships of Osiris, Adonis, and Attis had their respective seats, as we have seen, in Egypt, Syria, and Phrygia; and in each of these countries certain harvest and vintage customs are known to have been observed, the resemblance of which to each other and to the national rites struck the ancients themselves, and, compared with the harvest customs of modern peasants and barbarians, seems to throw some light on the origin of the rites in question.</p>
					<p>It has been already mentioned, on the authority of Diodorus, that in ancient Egypt the reapers were wont to lament over the first sheaf cut, invoking Isis as the goddess to whom they owed the discovery of corn.<a href="#note_630" id="noteref_630" name="noteref_630"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">630</span></span></a> To the plaintive song or cry sung or uttered by Egyptian reapers the Greeks gave the name of Maneros, and explained the name by a story that Maneros, the only son of the first Egyptian king, invented agriculture, and, dying an untimely death, was thus lamented by the people.<a href="#note_631" id="noteref_631" name="noteref_631"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">631</span></span></a> It appears, however, that the name Maneros is due to a misunderstanding of the formula <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mââ-ne-hra</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Come to the house,”</span> which has been discovered in various Egyptian writings, for example in the dirge of Isis in the Book of the Dead.<a href="#note_632" id="noteref_632" name="noteref_632"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">632</span></span></a> Hence we may suppose that the cry <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mââ-ne-hra</span></span> was chanted by the reapers over the cut corn as a dirge for the death of the corn-spirit (Isis or Osiris) and a prayer for its return. As the cry was raised over the first ears reaped, it would seem that the corn-spirit was believed by the Egyptians to be present in the first corn cut and to die under the sickle. We have seen that in the Malay Peninsula and Java the first ears of rice are taken to represent either the Soul of the Rice or the Rice-bride and the Rice-bridegroom.<a href="#note_633" id="noteref_633" name="noteref_633"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">633</span></span></a> In parts of Russia the first sheaf is treated much in the same way that the last sheaf is treated elsewhere. It is reaped by the mistress herself, taken home and set in the place of honour near the holy pictures; afterwards it is threshed separately, and some of its grain is mixed with the next year's seed-corn.<a href="#note_634" id="noteref_634" name="noteref_634"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">634</span></span></a> In Aberdeenshire, while the last corn cut was generally used to make the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">clyack</span></span> sheaf,<a href="#note_635" id="noteref_635" name="noteref_635"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">635</span></span></a> it was sometimes, though rarely, the first corn cut that was dressed up as a woman and carried home with ceremony.<a href="#note_636" id="noteref_636" name="noteref_636"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">636</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In Phoenicia and Western Asia a plaintive song, like that chanted by the Egyptian corn-reapers, was sung at the vintage and probably (to judge by analogy) also at harvest. This Phoenician song was called by the Greeks Linus or Ailinus and explained, like Maneros, as a lament for the death of a youth named Linus.<a href="#note_637" id="noteref_637" name="noteref_637"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">637</span></span></a> According to one story Linus was brought up by a shepherd, but torn to pieces by his dogs.<a href="#note_638" id="noteref_638" name="noteref_638"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">638</span></span></a> But, like Maneros, the name Linus or Ailinus appears to have originated in a verbal misunderstanding, and to be nothing more than the cry <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ai lanu</span></span>, that is <span class="tei tei-q">“Woe to us,”</span> which the Phoenicians probably uttered in mourning for Adonis;<a href="#note_639" id="noteref_639" name="noteref_639"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">639</span></span></a> at least Sappho seems to have regarded Adonis and Linus as equivalent.<a href="#note_640" id="noteref_640" name="noteref_640"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">640</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In Bithynia a like mournful ditty, called Bormus or Borimus, was chanted by Mariandynian reapers. Bormus was said to have been a handsome youth, the son of King Upias or of a wealthy and distinguished man. One summer day, watching the reapers at work in his fields, he went to fetch them a drink of water and was never heard of more. So the reapers sought for him, calling him in plaintive strains, which they continued to chant at harvest ever afterwards.<a href="#note_641" id="noteref_641" name="noteref_641"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">641</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. Killing the Corn-spirit.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>In Phrygia the corresponding song, sung by harvesters both at reaping and at threshing, was called Lityerses. According to one story, Lityerses was a bastard son of Midas, King of Phrygia, and dwelt at Celaenae. He used to reap the corn, and had an enormous appetite. When a stranger happened to enter the corn-field or to pass by it, Lityerses gave him plenty to eat and drink, then took him to the corn-fields on the banks of the Maeander and compelled him to reap along with him. Lastly, it was his custom to wrap the stranger in a sheaf, cut off his head with a sickle, and carry away his body, swathed in the corn stalks. But at last Hercules undertook to reap with him, cut off his head with the sickle, and threw his body into the river.<a href="#note_642" id="noteref_642" name="noteref_642"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">642</span></span></a> As Hercules is reported to have slain Lityerses in the same way that Lityerses slew others (as Theseus treated Sinis and Sciron), we may infer that Lityerses used to throw the bodies of his victims into the river. According to another version of the story, Lityerses, a son of Midas, was wont to challenge people to a reaping match with him, and if he vanquished them he used to thrash them; but one day he met with a stronger reaper, who slew him.<a href="#note_643" id="noteref_643" name="noteref_643"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">643</span></span></a></p>
					<p>There are some grounds for supposing that in these stories of Lityerses we have the description of a Phrygian harvest custom in accordance with which certain persons, especially strangers passing the harvest field, were regularly regarded as embodiments of the corn-spirit, and as such were seized by the reapers, wrapt in sheaves, and beheaded, their bodies, bound up in the corn-stalks, being afterwards thrown into water as a rain-charm. The grounds for this supposition are, first, the resemblance of the Lityerses story to the harvest customs of European peasantry, and, second, the frequency of human sacrifices offered by savage races to promote the fertility of the fields. We will examine these grounds successively, beginning with the former.</p>
					<p>In comparing the story with the harvest customs of Europe,<a href="#note_644" id="noteref_644" name="noteref_644"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">644</span></span></a> three points deserve special attention, namely: I. the reaping match and the binding of persons in the sheaves; II. the killing of the corn-spirit or his representatives; III. the treatment of visitors to the harvest field or of strangers passing it.</p>
					<p>I. In regard to the first head, we have seen that in modern Europe the person who cuts or binds or threshes the last sheaf is often exposed to rough treatment at the hands of his fellow-labourers. For example, he is bound up in the last sheaf, and, thus encased, is carried or carted about, beaten, drenched with water, thrown on a dunghill, and so forth. Or, if he is spared this horseplay, he is at least the subject of ridicule or is thought to be destined to suffer some misfortune in the course of the year. Hence the harvesters are naturally reluctant to give the last cut at reaping or the last stroke at threshing or to bind the last sheaf, and towards the close of the work this reluctance produces an emulation among the labourers, each striving to finish his task as fast as possible, in order that he may escape the invidious distinction of being last.<a href="#note_645" id="noteref_645" name="noteref_645"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">645</span></span></a> For example, in the neighbourhood of Danzig, when the winter corn is cut and mostly bound up in sheaves, the portion which still remains to be bound is divided amongst the women binders, each of whom receives a swath of equal length to bind. A crowd of reapers, children, and idlers gather round to witness the contest, and at the word, <span class="tei tei-q">“Seize the Old Man,”</span> the women fall to work, all binding their allotted swaths as hard as they can. The spectators watch them narrowly, and the woman who cannot keep pace with the rest and consequently binds the last sheaf has to carry the Old Man (that is, the last sheaf made up in the form of a man) to the farmhouse and deliver it to the farmer with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“Here I bring you the Old Man.”</span> At the supper which follows, the Old Man is placed at the table and receives an abundant portion of food, which, as he cannot eat it, falls to the share of the woman who carried him. Afterwards the Old Man is placed in the yard and all the people dance round him. Or the woman who bound the last sheaf dances for a good while with the Old Man, while the rest form a ring round them; afterwards they all, one after the other, dance a single round with him. Further, the woman who bound the last sheaf goes herself by the name of the Old Man till the next harvest, and is often mocked with the cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“Here comes the Old Man.”</span><a href="#note_646" id="noteref_646" name="noteref_646"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">646</span></span></a> In the Mittelmark district of Prussia, when the rye has been reaped, and the last sheaves are about to be tied up, the binders stand in two rows facing each other, every woman with her sheaf and her straw rope before her. At a given signal they all tie up their sheaves, and the one who is the last to finish is ridiculed by the rest. Not only so, but her sheaf is made up into human shape and called the Old Man, and she must carry it home to the farmyard, where the harvesters dance in a circle round her and it. Then they take the Old Man to the farmer and deliver it to him with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“We bring the Old Man to the Master. He may keep him till he gets a new one.”</span> After that the Old Man is set up against a tree, where he remains for a long time, the butt of many jests.<a href="#note_647" id="noteref_647" name="noteref_647"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">647</span></span></a> At Aschbach in Bavaria, when the reaping is nearly finished, the reapers say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Now, we will drive out the Old Man.”</span> Each of them sets himself to reap a patch of corn as fast as he can; he who cuts the last handful or the last stalk is greeted by the rest with an exulting cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“You have the Old Man.”</span> Sometimes a black mask is fastened on the reaper's face and he is dressed in woman's clothes; or if the reaper is a woman, she is dressed in man's clothes. A dance follows. At the supper the Old Man gets twice as large a portion of food as the others. The proceedings are similar at threshing; the person who gives the last stroke is said to have the Old Man. At the supper given to the threshers he has to eat out of the cream-ladle and to drink a great deal. Moreover, he is quizzed and teased in all sorts of ways till he frees himself from further annoyance by treating the others to brandy or beer.<a href="#note_648" id="noteref_648" name="noteref_648"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">648</span></span></a></p>
					<p>These examples illustrate the contests in reaping, threshing, and binding which take place amongst the harvesters, from their unwillingness to suffer the ridicule and discomfort incurred by the one who happens to finish his work last. It will be remembered that the person who is last at reaping, binding, or threshing, is regarded as the representative of the corn-spirit,<a href="#note_649" id="noteref_649" name="noteref_649"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">649</span></span></a> and this idea is more fully expressed by binding him or her in corn-stalks. The latter custom has been already illustrated, but a few more instances may be added. At Kloxin, near Stettin, the harvesters call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <span class="tei tei-q">“You have the Old Man, and must keep him.”</span> The Old Man is a great bundle of corn decked with flowers and ribbons, and fashioned into a rude semblance of the human form. It is fastened on a rake or strapped on a horse, and brought with music to the village. In delivering the Old Man to the farmer, the woman says:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Here, dear Sir, is the Old Man.</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">He can stay no longer on the field,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">He can hide himself no longer,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">He must come into the village.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Ladies and gentlemen, pray be so kind</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">As to give the Old Man a present.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>As late as the first half of the nineteenth century the custom was to tie up the woman herself in pease-straw, and bring her with music to the farmhouse, where the harvesters danced with her till the pease-straw fell off.<a href="#note_650" id="noteref_650" name="noteref_650"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">650</span></span></a> In other villages round Stettin, when the last harvest-waggon is being loaded, there is a regular race amongst the women, each striving not to be last. For she who places the last sheaf on the waggon is called the Old Man, and is completely swathed in corn-stalks; she is also decked with flowers, and flowers and a helmet of straw are placed on her head. In solemn procession she carries the harvest-crown to the squire, over whose head she holds it while she utters a string of good wishes. At the dance which follows, the Old Man has the right to choose his, or rather her, partner; it is an honour to dance with him.<a href="#note_651" id="noteref_651" name="noteref_651"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">651</span></span></a> At Blankenfelde, in the district of Potsdam, the woman who binds the last sheaf at the rye-harvest is saluted with the cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“You have the Old Man.”</span> A woman is then tied up in the last sheaf in such a way that only her head is left free; her hair also is covered with a cap made of rye-stalks, adorned with ribbons and flowers. She is called the Harvest-man, and must keep dancing in front of the last harvest-waggon till it reaches the squire's house, where she receives a present and is released from her envelope of corn.<a href="#note_652" id="noteref_652" name="noteref_652"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">652</span></span></a> At Gommern, near Magdeburg, the reaper who cuts the last ears of corn is often wrapt up in corn-stalks so completely that it is hard to see whether there is a man in the bundle or not. Thus wrapt up he is taken by another stalwart reaper on his back, and carried round the field amidst the joyous cries of the harvesters.<a href="#note_653" id="noteref_653" name="noteref_653"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">653</span></span></a> At Neuhausen, near Merseburg, the person who binds the last sheaf is wrapt in ears of oats and saluted as the Oats-man, whereupon the others dance round him.<a href="#note_654" id="noteref_654" name="noteref_654"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">654</span></span></a> At Brie, Isle de France, the farmer himself is tied up in the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">first</span></em> sheaf.<a href="#note_655" id="noteref_655" name="noteref_655"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">655</span></span></a> At the harvest-home at Udvarhely, Transylvania, a person is encased in corn-stalks, and wears on his head a crown made out of the last ears cut. On reaching the village he is soused with water over and over.<a href="#note_656" id="noteref_656" name="noteref_656"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">656</span></span></a> At Dingelstedt, in the district of Erfurt, down to the first half of the nineteenth century it was the custom to tie up a man in the last sheaf. He was called the Old Man, and was brought home on the last waggon, amid huzzas and music. On reaching the farmyard he was rolled round the barn and drenched with water.<a href="#note_657" id="noteref_657" name="noteref_657"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">657</span></span></a> At Nördlingen in Bavaria the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is wrapt in straw and rolled on the threshing-floor.<a href="#note_658" id="noteref_658" name="noteref_658"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">658</span></span></a> In some parts of Oberpfalz, Bavaria, he is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“get the Old Man,”</span> is wrapt in straw, and carried to a neighbour who has not yet finished his threshing.<a href="#note_659" id="noteref_659" name="noteref_659"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">659</span></span></a> In Silesia the woman who binds the last sheaf has to submit to a good deal of horse-play. She is pushed, knocked down, and tied up in the sheaf, after which she is called the corn-puppet (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Kornpopel</span></span>).<a href="#note_660" id="noteref_660" name="noteref_660"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">660</span></span></a> In Thüringen a sausage is stuck in the last sheaf at threshing, and thrown, with the sheaf, on the threshing-floor. It is called the <i xml:lang="de">Barrenwurst</i> or <i xml:lang="de">Bazenwurst</i>, and is eaten by all the threshers. After they have eaten it a man is encased in pease-straw, and thus attired is led through the village.<a href="#note_661" id="noteref_661" name="noteref_661"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">661</span></span></a></p>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“In all these cases the idea is that the spirit of the corn—the Old Man of vegetation—is driven out of the corn last cut or last threshed, and lives in the barn during the winter. At sowing-time he goes out again to the fields to resume his activity as animating force among the sprouting corn.”</span><a href="#note_662" id="noteref_662" name="noteref_662">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">662</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<p>Ideas of the same sort appear to attach to the last corn in India. At Hoshangábád, in Central India, when the reaping is nearly done, a patch of corn, about a rood in extent, is left standing in the cultivator's last field, and the reapers rest a little. Then they rush at this remnant, tear it up, and cast it into the air, shouting victory to one or other of the local gods, according to their religious persuasion. A sheaf is made out of this corn, tied to a bamboo, set up in the last harvest cart, and carried home in triumph. Here it is fastened up in the threshing-floor or attached to a tree or to the cattle-shed, where its services are held to be essential for the purpose of averting the evil-eye.<a href="#note_663" id="noteref_663" name="noteref_663"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">663</span></span></a> A like custom prevails in the eastern districts of the North-Western Provinces of India. Sometimes a little patch is left untilled as a refuge for the field-spirit; sometimes it is sown, and when the corn of this patch has been reaped with a rush and a shout, it is presented to the priest, who offers it to the local gods or bestows it on a beggar.<a href="#note_664" id="noteref_664" name="noteref_664"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">664</span></span></a></p>
					<p>II. Passing to the second point of comparison between the Lityerses story and European harvest customs, we have now to see that in the latter the corn-spirit is often believed to be killed at reaping or threshing. In the Romsdal and other parts of Norway, when the haymaking is over, the people say that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Hay-man has been killed.”</span> In some parts of Bavaria the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is said to have killed the Corn-man, the Oats-man, or the Wheat-man, according to the crop.<a href="#note_665" id="noteref_665" name="noteref_665"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">665</span></span></a> In the Canton of Tillot, in Lothringen, at threshing the last corn the men keep time with their flails, calling out as they thresh, <span class="tei tei-q">“We are killing the Old Woman! We are killing the Old Woman!”</span> If there is an old woman in the house she is warned to save herself, or she will be struck dead.<a href="#note_666" id="noteref_666" name="noteref_666"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">666</span></span></a> Near Ragnit, in Lithuania, the last handful of corn is left standing by itself, with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Old Woman (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Boba</span></span>) is sitting in there.”</span> Then a young reaper whets his scythe, and, with a strong sweep, cuts down the handful. It is now said of him that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has cut off the Boba's head”</span>; and he receives a gratuity from the farmer and a jugful of water over his head from the farmer's wife.<a href="#note_667" id="noteref_667" name="noteref_667"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">667</span></span></a> According to another account, every Lithuanian reaper makes haste to finish his task; for the Old Rye-woman lives in the last stalks, and whoever cuts the last stalks kills the Old Rye-woman, and by killing her he brings trouble on himself.<a href="#note_668" id="noteref_668" name="noteref_668"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">668</span></span></a> In Wilkischken, in the district of Tilsit, the man who cuts the last corn goes by the name of <span class="tei tei-q">“the killer of the Rye-woman.”</span><a href="#note_669" id="noteref_669" name="noteref_669"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">669</span></span></a> In Lithuania, again, the corn-spirit is believed to be killed at threshing as well as at reaping. When only a single pile of corn remains to be threshed, all the threshers suddenly step back a few paces, as if at the word of command. Then they fall to work, plying their flails with the utmost rapidity and vehemence, till they come to the last bundle. Upon this they fling themselves with almost frantic fury, straining every nerve, and raining blows on it till the word <span class="tei tei-q">“Halt!”</span> rings out sharply from the leader. The man whose flail is the last to fall after the command to stop has been given is immediately surrounded by all the rest, crying out that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has struck the Old Rye-woman dead.”</span> He has to expiate the deed by treating them to brandy; and, like the man who cuts the last corn, he is known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the killer of the Old Rye-woman.”</span><a href="#note_670" id="noteref_670" name="noteref_670"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">670</span></span></a> Sometimes in Lithuania the slain corn-spirit was represented by a puppet. Thus a female figure was made out of corn-stalks, dressed in clothes, and placed on the threshing-floor, under the heap of corn which was to be threshed last. Whoever thereafter gave the last stroke at threshing <span class="tei tei-q">“struck the Old Woman dead.”</span><a href="#note_671" id="noteref_671" name="noteref_671"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">671</span></span></a> We have already met with examples of burning the figure which represents the corn-spirit.<a href="#note_672" id="noteref_672" name="noteref_672"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">672</span></span></a> In the East Riding of Yorkshire a custom called <span class="tei tei-q">“burning the Old Witch”</span> is observed on the last day of harvest. A small sheaf of corn is burnt on the field in a fire of stubble; peas are parched at the fire and eaten with a liberal allowance of ale; and the lads and lasses romp about the flames and amuse themselves by blackening each other's faces.<a href="#note_673" id="noteref_673" name="noteref_673"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">673</span></span></a> Sometimes, again, the corn-spirit is represented by a man, who lies down under the last corn; it is threshed upon his body, and the people say that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man is being beaten to death.”</span><a href="#note_674" id="noteref_674" name="noteref_674"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">674</span></span></a> We saw that sometimes the farmer's wife is thrust, together with the last sheaf, under the threshing-machine, as if to thresh her, and that afterwards a pretence is made of winnowing her.<a href="#note_675" id="noteref_675" name="noteref_675"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">675</span></span></a> At Volders, in the Tyrol, husks of corn are stuck behind the neck of the man who gives the last stroke at threshing, and he is throttled with a straw garland. If he is tall, it is believed that the corn will be tall next year. Then he is tied on a bundle and flung into the river.<a href="#note_676" id="noteref_676" name="noteref_676"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">676</span></span></a> In Carinthia, the thresher who gave the last stroke, and the person who untied the last sheaf on the threshing-floor, are bound hand and foot with straw bands, and crowns of straw are placed on their heads. Then they are tied, face to face, on a sledge, dragged through the village, and flung into a brook.<a href="#note_677" id="noteref_677" name="noteref_677"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">677</span></span></a> The custom of throwing the representative of the corn-spirit into a stream, like that of drenching him with water, is, as usual, a rain-charm.<a href="#note_678" id="noteref_678" name="noteref_678"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">678</span></span></a></p>
					<p>III. Thus far the representatives of the corn-spirit have generally been the man or woman who cuts, binds, or threshes the last corn. We now come to the cases in which the corn-spirit is represented either by a stranger passing the harvest-field (as in the Lityerses tale), or by a visitor entering it for the first time. All over Germany it is customary for the reapers or threshers to lay hold of passing strangers and bind them with a rope made of corn-stalks, till they pay a forfeit; and when the farmer himself or one of his guests enters the field or the threshing-floor for the first time, he is treated in the same way. Sometimes the rope is only tied round his arm or his feet or his neck.<a href="#note_679" id="noteref_679" name="noteref_679"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">679</span></span></a> But sometimes he is regularly swathed in corn. Thus at Solör in Norway, whoever enters the field, be he the master or a stranger, is tied up in a sheaf and must pay a ransom. In the neighbourhood of Soest, when the farmer visits the flax-pullers for the first time, he is completely enveloped in flax. Passers-by are also surrounded by the women, tied up in flax, and compelled to stand brandy.<a href="#note_680" id="noteref_680" name="noteref_680"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">680</span></span></a> At Nördlingen strangers are caught with straw ropes and tied up in a sheaf till they pay a forfeit.<a href="#note_681" id="noteref_681" name="noteref_681"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">681</span></span></a> Among the Germans of Haselberg, in West Bohemia, as soon as a farmer had given the last corn to be threshed on the threshing-floor, he was swathed in it and had to redeem himself by a present of cakes.<a href="#note_682" id="noteref_682" name="noteref_682"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">682</span></span></a> In Anhalt, when the proprietor or one of his family, the steward, or even a stranger enters the harvest-field for the first time after the reaping has begun, the wife of the chief reaper ties a rope twisted of corn-ears, or a nosegay made of corn-ears and flowers, to his arm, and he is obliged to ransom himself by the payment of a fine.<a href="#note_683" id="noteref_683" name="noteref_683"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">683</span></span></a> In the canton of Putanges, in Normandy, a pretence of tying up the owner of the land in the last sheaf of wheat is still practised, or at least was still practised some quarter of a century ago. The task falls to the women alone. They throw themselves on the proprietor, seize him by the arms, the legs, and the body, throw him to the ground, and stretch him on the last sheaf. Then a show is made of binding him, and the conditions to be observed at the harvest-supper are dictated to him. When he has accepted them, he is released and allowed to get up.<a href="#note_684" id="noteref_684" name="noteref_684"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">684</span></span></a> At Brie, Isle de France, when any one who does not belong to the farm passes by the harvest-field, the reapers give chase. If they catch him, they bind him in a sheaf and bite him, one after the other, in the forehead, crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“You shall carry the key of the field.”</span><a href="#note_685" id="noteref_685" name="noteref_685"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">685</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“To have the key”</span> is an expression used by harvesters elsewhere in the sense of to cut or bind or thresh the last sheaf;<a href="#note_686" id="noteref_686" name="noteref_686"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">686</span></span></a> hence, it is equivalent to the phrases <span class="tei tei-q">“You have the Old Man,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“You are the Old Man,”</span> which are addressed to the cutter, binder, or thresher of the last sheaf. Therefore, when a stranger, as at Brie, is tied up in a sheaf and told that he will <span class="tei tei-q">“carry the key of the field,”</span> it is as much as to say that he is the Old Man, that is, an embodiment of the corn-spirit. In hop-picking, if a well-dressed stranger passes the hop-yard, he is seized by the women, tumbled into the bin, covered with leaves, and not released till he has paid a fine.<a href="#note_687" id="noteref_687" name="noteref_687"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">687</span></span></a> In some parts of Scotland, particularly in the counties of Fife and Kinross, down to recent times the reapers used to seize and dump, as it was called, any stranger who happened to visit or pass by the harvest field. The custom was to lay hold of the stranger by his ankles and armpits, lift him up, and bring the lower part of his person into violent contact with the ground. Women as well as men were liable to be thus treated. The practice of interposing a sheaf between the sufferer and the ground is said to be a modern refinement.<a href="#note_688" id="noteref_688" name="noteref_688"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">688</span></span></a> Comparing this custom with the one practised at Putanges in Normandy, which has just been described, we may conjecture that in Scotland the <span class="tei tei-q">“dumping”</span> of strangers on the harvest-field was originally a preliminary to wrapping them up in sheaves of corn.</p>
					<p>Ceremonies of a somewhat similar kind are performed by the Tarahumare Indians of Mexico not only at harvest but also at hoeing and ploughing. <span class="tei tei-q">“When the work of hoeing and weeding is finished, the workers seize the master of the field, and, tying his arms crosswise behind him, load all the implements, that is to say, the hoes, upon his back, fastening them with ropes. Then they form two single columns, the landlord in the middle between them, and all facing the house. Thus they start homeward. Simultaneously the two men at the heads of the columns begin to run rapidly forward some thirty yards, cross each other, then turn back, run along the two columns, cross each other again at the rear and take their places each at the end of his row. As they pass each other ahead and in the rear of the columns they beat their mouths with the hollow of their hands and yell. As soon as they reach their places at the foot, the next pair in front of the columns starts off, running in the same way, and thus pair after pair performs the tour, the procession all the time advancing toward the house. A short distance in front of it they come to a halt, and are met by two young men who carry red handkerchiefs tied to sticks like flags. The father of the family, still tied up and loaded with the hoes, steps forward alone and kneels down in front of his house-door. The flag-bearers wave their banners over him, and the women of the household come out and kneel on their left knees, first toward the east, and after a little while toward each of the other cardinal points, west, south, and north. In conclusion the flags are waved in front of the house. The father then rises and the people untie him, whereupon he first salutes the women with the usual greeting, <span class="tei tei-q">‘<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Kwīra!</span></span>’</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">‘<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Kwirevá!</span></span>’</span> Now they all go into the house, and the man makes a short speech thanking them all for the assistance they have given him, for how could he have gotten through his work without them? They have provided him with a year's life (that is, with the wherewithal to sustain it), and now he is going to give them tesvino. He gives a drinking-gourd full to each one in the assembly, and appoints one man among them to distribute more to all. The same ceremony is performed after the ploughing and after the harvesting. On the first occasion the tied man may be made to carry the yoke of the oxen, on the second he does not carry anything.”</span><a href="#note_689" id="noteref_689" name="noteref_689"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">689</span></span></a> The meaning of these Mexican ceremonies is not clear. Perhaps the custom of tying up the farmer at hoeing, ploughing, and reaping is a form of expiation or apology offered to the spirits of the earth, who are naturally disturbed by agricultural operations.<a href="#note_690" id="noteref_690" name="noteref_690"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">690</span></span></a> When the Yabim of Simbang in German New Guinea see that the taro plants in their fields are putting forth leaves, they offer sacrifice of sago-broth and pork to the spirits of the former owners of the land, in order that they may be kindly disposed and not do harm but let the fruits ripen.<a href="#note_691" id="noteref_691" name="noteref_691"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">691</span></span></a> Similarly when the Alfoors or Toradjas of Central Celebes are planting a new field, they offer rice, eggs, and so forth to the souls of the former owners of the land, hoping that, mollified by these offerings, the souls will make the crops to grow and thrive.<a href="#note_692" id="noteref_692" name="noteref_692"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">692</span></span></a> However, this explanation of the Mexican ceremonies at hoeing, ploughing, and reaping is purely conjectural. In these ceremonies there is no evidence that, as in the parallel European customs, the farmer is identified with the corn-spirit, since he is not wrapt up in the sheaves.</p>
					<p>Be that as it may, the evidence adduced above suffices to prove that, like the ancient Lityerses, modern European reapers have been wont to lay hold of a passing stranger and tie him up in a sheaf. It is not to be expected that they should complete the parallel by cutting off his head; but if they do not take such a strong step, their language and gestures are at least indicative of a desire to do so. For instance, in Mecklenburg on the first day of reaping, if the master or mistress or a stranger enters the field, or merely passes by it, all the mowers face towards him and sharpen their scythes, clashing their whet-stones against them in unison, as if they were making ready to mow. Then the woman who leads the mowers steps up to him and ties a band round his left arm. He must ransom himself by payment of a forfeit.<a href="#note_693" id="noteref_693" name="noteref_693"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">693</span></span></a> Near Ratzeburg, when the master or other person of mark enters the field or passes by it, all the harvesters stop work and march towards him in a body, the men with their scythes in front. On meeting him they form up in line, men and women. The men stick the poles of their scythes in the ground, as they do in whetting them; then they take off their caps and hang them on the scythes, while their leader stands forward and makes a speech. When he has done, they all whet their scythes in measured time very loudly, after which they put on their caps. Two of the women binders then come forward; one of them ties the master or stranger (as the case may be) with corn-ears or with a silken band; the other delivers a rhyming address. The following are specimens of the speeches made by the reaper on these occasions. In some parts of Pomerania every passer-by is stopped, his way being barred with a corn-rope. The reapers form a circle round him and sharpen their scythes, while their leader says:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The men are ready,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The scythes are bent,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The corn is great and small,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The gentleman must be mowed.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Then the process of whetting the scythes is repeated.<a href="#note_694" id="noteref_694" name="noteref_694"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">694</span></span></a> At Ramin, in the district of Stettin, the stranger, standing encircled by the reapers, is thus addressed:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We'll stroke the gentleman</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">With our naked sword,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Wherewith we shear meadows and fields.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We shear princes and lords.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Labourers are often athirst;</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">If the gentleman will stand beer and brandy</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The joke will soon be over.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">But, if our prayer he does not like,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The sword has a right to strike.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_695" id="noteref_695" name="noteref_695">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">695</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>That in these customs the whetting of the scythes is really meant as a preliminary to mowing appears from the following variation of the preceding customs. In the district of Lüneburg, when any one enters the harvest-field, he is asked whether he will engage a good fellow. If he says yes, the harvesters mow some swaths, yelling and screaming, and then ask him for drink-money.<a href="#note_696" id="noteref_696" name="noteref_696"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">696</span></span></a></p>
					<p>On the threshing-floor strangers are also regarded as embodiments of the corn-spirit, and are treated accordingly. At Wiedingharde in Schleswig when a stranger comes to the threshing-floor he is asked, <span class="tei tei-q">“Shall I teach you the flail-dance?”</span> If he says yes, they put the arms of the threshing-flail round his neck as if he were a sheaf of corn, and press them together so tight that he is nearly choked.<a href="#note_697" id="noteref_697" name="noteref_697"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">697</span></span></a> In some parishes of Wermland (Sweden), when a stranger enters the threshing-floor where the threshers are at work, they say that <span class="tei tei-q">“they will teach him the threshing-song.”</span> Then they put a flail round his neck and a straw rope about his body. Also, as we have seen, if a stranger woman enters the threshing-floor, the threshers put a flail round her body and a wreath of corn-stalks round her neck, and call out, <span class="tei tei-q">“See the Corn-woman! See! that is how the Corn-maiden looks!”</span><a href="#note_698" id="noteref_698" name="noteref_698"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">698</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In these customs, observed both on the harvest-field and on the threshing-floor, a passing stranger is regarded as a personification of the corn, in other words, as the corn-spirit; and a show is made of treating him like the corn by mowing, binding, and threshing him. If the reader still doubts whether European peasants can really regard a passing stranger in this light, the following custom should set his doubts at rest. During the madder-harvest in the Dutch province of Zealand a stranger passing by a field, where the people are digging the madder-roots, will sometimes call out to them <i xml:lang="nl">Koortspillers</i> (a term of reproach). Upon this, two of the fleetest runners make after him, and, if they catch him, they bring him back to the madder-field and bury him in the earth up to his middle at least, jeering at him the while; then they ease nature before his face.<a href="#note_699" id="noteref_699" name="noteref_699"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">699</span></span></a></p>
					<p>This last act is to be explained as follows. The spirit of the corn and of other cultivated plants is sometimes conceived, not as immanent in the plant, but as its owner; hence the cutting of the corn at harvest, the digging of the roots, and the gathering of fruit from the fruit-trees are each and all of them acts of spoliation, which strip him of his property and reduce him to poverty. Hence he is often known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the Poor Man”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“the Poor Woman.”</span> Thus in the neighbourhood of Eisenach a small sheaf is sometimes left standing on the field for <span class="tei tei-q">“the Poor Old Woman.”</span><a href="#note_700" id="noteref_700" name="noteref_700"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">700</span></span></a> At Marksuhl, near Eisenach, the puppet formed out of the last sheaf is itself called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Poor Woman.”</span> At Alt Lest in Silesia the man who binds the last sheaf is called the Beggar-man.<a href="#note_701" id="noteref_701" name="noteref_701"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">701</span></span></a> In a village near Roeskilde, in Zealand (Denmark), old-fashioned peasants sometimes make up the last sheaf into a rude puppet, which is called the Rye-beggar.<a href="#note_702" id="noteref_702" name="noteref_702"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">702</span></span></a> In Southern Schonen the sheaf which is bound last is called the Beggar; it is made bigger than the rest and is sometimes dressed in clothes. In the district of Olmütz the last sheaf is called the Beggar; it is given to an old woman, who must carry it home, limping on one foot.<a href="#note_703" id="noteref_703" name="noteref_703"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">703</span></span></a> Sometimes a little of the crop is left on the field for the spirit, under other names than <span class="tei tei-q">“the Poor Old Woman.”</span> Thus at Szagmanten, a village of the Tilsit district, the last sheaf was left standing on the field <span class="tei tei-q">“for the Old Rye-woman.”</span><a href="#note_704" id="noteref_704" name="noteref_704"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">704</span></span></a> In Neftenbach (Canton of Zurich) the first three ears of corn reaped are thrown away on the field <span class="tei tei-q">“to satisfy the Corn-mother and to make the next year's crop abundant.”</span><a href="#note_705" id="noteref_705" name="noteref_705"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">705</span></span></a> At Kupferberg, in Bavaria, some corn is left standing on the field when the rest has been cut. Of this corn left standing they say that <span class="tei tei-q">“it belongs to the Old Woman,”</span> to whom it is dedicated in the following words:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We give it to the Old Woman;</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">She shall keep it.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Next year may she be to us</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">As kind as this time she has been.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_706" id="noteref_706" name="noteref_706">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">706</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>These words clearly shew that the Old Woman for whom the corn is left on the field is not a real personage, poor and hungry, but the mythical Old Woman who makes the corn to grow. At Schüttarschen, in West Bohemia, after the crop has been reaped, a few stalks are left standing and a garland is attached to them. <span class="tei tei-q">“That belongs to the Wood-woman,”</span> they say, and offer a prayer. In this way the Wood-woman, we are told, has enough to live on through the winter and the corn will thrive the better next year. The same thing is done for all the different kinds of corn-crop.<a href="#note_707" id="noteref_707" name="noteref_707"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">707</span></span></a> So in Thüringen, when the after-grass (<i xml:lang="de">Grummet</i>) is being got in, a little heap is left lying on the field; it belongs to <span class="tei tei-q">“the Little Wood-woman”</span> in return for the blessing she has bestowed.<a href="#note_708" id="noteref_708" name="noteref_708"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">708</span></span></a> In the Frankenwald of Bavaria three handfuls of flax were left on the field <span class="tei tei-q">“for the Wood-woman.”</span><a href="#note_709" id="noteref_709" name="noteref_709"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">709</span></span></a> At Lindau in Anhalt the reapers used to leave some stalks standing in the last corner of the last field for <span class="tei tei-q">“the Corn-woman to eat.”</span><a href="#note_710" id="noteref_710" name="noteref_710"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">710</span></span></a> In some parts of Silesia it was till lately the custom to leave a few corn-stalks standing in the field, <span class="tei tei-q">“in order that the next harvest should not fail.”</span><a href="#note_711" id="noteref_711" name="noteref_711"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">711</span></span></a> In Russia it is customary to leave patches of unreaped corn in the fields and to place bread and salt on the ground near them. <span class="tei tei-q">“These ears are eventually knotted together, and the ceremony is called <span class="tei tei-q">‘the plaiting of the beard of Volos,’</span> and it is supposed that after it has been performed no wizard or other evilly-disposed person will be able to hurt the produce of the fields. The unreaped patch is looked upon as tabooed; and it is believed that if any one meddles with it he will shrivel up, and become twisted like the interwoven ears. Similar customs are kept up in various parts of Russia. Near Kursk and Voroneje, for instance, a patch of rye is usually left in honour of the Prophet Elijah, and in another district one of oats is consecrated to St. Nicholas. As it is well known that both the Saint and the Prophet have succeeded to the place once held in the estimation of the Russian people by Perun, it seems probable that Volos really was, in ancient times, one of the names of the thunder-god.”</span><a href="#note_712" id="noteref_712" name="noteref_712"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">712</span></span></a> In the north-east of Scotland a few stalks were sometimes left unreaped on the field for the benefit of <span class="tei tei-q">“the aul' man.”</span><a href="#note_713" id="noteref_713" name="noteref_713"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">713</span></span></a> Here <span class="tei tei-q">“the aul' man”</span> is probably the equivalent of the harvest Old Man of Germany.<a href="#note_714" id="noteref_714" name="noteref_714"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">714</span></span></a> Among the Mohammedans of Zanzibar it is customary at sowing a field to reserve a certain portion of it for the guardian spirits, who at harvest are invited, to the tuck of drum, to come and take their share; tiny huts are also built in which food is deposited for their use.<a href="#note_715" id="noteref_715" name="noteref_715"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">715</span></span></a> In the island of Nias, to prevent the depredations of wandering spirits among the rice at harvest, a miniature field is dedicated to them and in it are sown all the plants that grow in the real fields.<a href="#note_716" id="noteref_716" name="noteref_716"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">716</span></span></a> The Hos, a Ewe tribe of negroes in Togoland, observe a similar custom for a similar reason. At the entrance to their yam-fields the traveller may see on both sides of the path small mounds on which yams, stock-yams, beans, and maize are planted and appear to flourish with more than usual luxuriance. These little gardens, tended with peculiar care, are dedicated to the <span class="tei tei-q">“guardian gods”</span> of the owner of the land; there he cultivates for their benefit the same plants which he cultivates for his own use in the fields; and the notion is that the <span class="tei tei-q">“guardian gods”</span> will content themselves with eating the fruits which grow in their little private preserves and will not poach on the crops which are destined for human use.<a href="#note_717" id="noteref_717" name="noteref_717"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">717</span></span></a></p>
					<p>These customs suggest that the little sacred rice-fields on which the Kayans of Borneo perform the various operations of husbandry in mimicry before they address themselves to the real labours of the field,<a href="#note_718" id="noteref_718" name="noteref_718"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">718</span></span></a> may be dedicated to the spirits of the rice to compensate them for the loss they sustain by allowing men to cultivate all the rest of the land for their own benefit. Perhaps the Rarian plain at Eleusis<a href="#note_719" id="noteref_719" name="noteref_719"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">719</span></span></a> was a spiritual preserve of the same kind set apart for the exclusive use of the corn-goddesses Demeter and Persephone. It may even be that the law which forbade the Hebrews to reap the corners and gather the gleanings of the harvest-fields and to strip the vines of their last grapes<a href="#note_720" id="noteref_720" name="noteref_720"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">720</span></span></a> was originally intended for the benefit, not of the human poor, but of the poor spirits of the corn and the vine, who had just been despoiled by the reapers and the vintagers, and who, if some provision were not made for their subsistence, would naturally die of hunger before another year came round. In providing for their wants the prudent husbandman was really consulting his own interests; for how could he expect to reap wheat and barley and to gather grapes next year if he suffered the spirits of the corn and of the vine to perish of famine in the meantime? This train of thought may possibly explain the wide-spread custom of offering the first-fruits of the crops to gods or spirits:<a href="#note_721" id="noteref_721" name="noteref_721"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">721</span></span></a> such offerings may have been originally not so much an expression of gratitude for benefits received as a means of enabling the benefactors to continue their benefactions in time to come. Primitive man has generally a shrewd eye to the main chance: he is more prone to provide for the future than to sentimentalise over the past.</p>
					<p>Thus when the spirit of vegetation is conceived as a being who is robbed of his store and impoverished by the harvesters, it is natural that his representative—the passing stranger—should upbraid them; and it is equally natural that they should seek to disable him from pursuing them and recapturing the stolen property. Now, it is an old superstition that by easing nature on the spot where a robbery is committed, the robbers secure themselves, for a certain time, against interruption.<a href="#note_722" id="noteref_722" name="noteref_722"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">722</span></span></a> Hence when madder-diggers resort to this proceeding in presence of the stranger whom they have caught and buried in the field, we may infer that they consider themselves robbers and him as the person robbed. Regarded as such, he must be the natural owner of the madder-roots, that is, their spirit or demon; and this conception is carried out by burying him, like the madder-roots, in the ground.<a href="#note_723" id="noteref_723" name="noteref_723"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">723</span></span></a> The Greeks, it may be observed, were quite familiar with the idea that a passing stranger may be a god. Homer says that the gods in the likeness of foreigners roam up and down cities.<a href="#note_724" id="noteref_724" name="noteref_724"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">724</span></span></a> Once in Poso, a district of Celebes, when a new missionary entered a house where a number of people were gathered round a sick man, one of them addressed the newcomer in these words: <span class="tei tei-q">“Well, sir, as we had never seen you before, and you came suddenly in, while we sat here by ourselves, we thought it was a spirit.”</span><a href="#note_725" id="noteref_725" name="noteref_725"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">725</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Thus in these harvest-customs of modern Europe the person who cuts, binds, or threshes the last corn is treated as an embodiment of the corn-spirit by being wrapt up in sheaves, killed in mimicry by agricultural implements, and thrown into the water.<a href="#note_726" id="noteref_726" name="noteref_726"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">726</span></span></a> These coincidences with the Lityerses story seem to prove that the latter is a genuine description of an old Phrygian harvest-custom. But since in the modern parallels the killing of the personal representative of the corn-spirit is necessarily omitted or at most enacted only in mimicry, it is desirable to shew that in rude society human beings have been commonly killed as an agricultural ceremony to promote the fertility of the fields. The following examples will make this plain.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 3. Human Sacrifices for the Crops.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>The Indians of Guayaquil, in Ecuador, used to sacrifice human blood and the hearts of men when they sowed their fields.<a href="#note_727" id="noteref_727" name="noteref_727"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">727</span></span></a> The people of Cañar (now Cuenca in Ecuador) used to sacrifice a hundred children annually at harvest. The kings of Quito, the Incas of Peru, and for a long time the Spaniards were unable to suppress the bloody rite.<a href="#note_728" id="noteref_728" name="noteref_728"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">728</span></span></a> At a Mexican harvest-festival, when the first-fruits of the season were offered to the sun, a criminal was placed between two immense stones, balanced opposite each other, and was crushed by them as they fell together. His remains were buried, and a feast and dance followed. This sacrifice was known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the meeting of the stones.”</span><a href="#note_729" id="noteref_729" name="noteref_729"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">729</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Tlaloc was worshipped in Mexico as the god of the thunder and the storm which precedes the fertilising rain; elsewhere his wife Xochiquetzal, who at Tlaxcallan was called Matlalcuéyé or the Lady of the Blue Petticoats, shared these honours, and it was to her that many countries in Central America particularly paid their devotions. Every year, at the time when the cobs of the still green and milky maize are about to coagulate and ripen, they used to sacrifice to the goddess four young girls, chosen among the noblest families of the country; they were decked out in festal attire, crowned with flowers, and conveyed in rich palanquins to the brink of the hallowed waters, where the sacrifice was to be offered. The priests, clad in long floating robes, their heads encircled with feather crowns, marched in front of the litters carrying censers with burning incense. The town of Elopango, celebrated for its temple, was near the lake of the same name, the etymology of which refers to the sheaves of tender maize (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">elotl</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">‘sheaf of tender maize’</span>). It was dedicated to the goddess Xochiquetzal, to whom the young victims were offered by being hurled from the top of a rock into the abyss. At the moment of consummating this inhuman rite, the priests addressed themselves in turn to the four virgins in order to banish the fear of death from their minds. They drew for them a bright picture of the delights they were about to enjoy in the company of the gods, and advised them not to forget the earth which they had left behind, but to entreat the divinity, to whom they despatched them, to bless the forthcoming harvest.”</span><a href="#note_730" id="noteref_730" name="noteref_730"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">730</span></span></a> We have seen that the ancient Mexicans also sacrificed human beings at all the various stages in the growth of the maize, the age of the victims corresponding to the age of the corn; for they sacrificed new-born babes at sowing, older children when the grain had sprouted, and so on till it was fully ripe, when they sacrificed old men.<a href="#note_731" id="noteref_731" name="noteref_731"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">731</span></span></a> No doubt the correspondence between the ages of the victims and the state of the corn was supposed to enhance the efficacy of the sacrifice.</p>
					<p>The Pawnees annually sacrificed a human victim in spring when they sowed their fields. The sacrifice was believed to have been enjoined on them by the Morning Star, or by a certain bird which the Morning Star had sent to them as its messenger. The bird was stuffed and preserved as a powerful talisman. They thought that an omission of this sacrifice would be followed by the total failure of the crops of maize, beans, and pumpkins. The victim was a captive of either sex. He was clad in the gayest and most costly attire, was fattened on the choicest food, and carefully kept in ignorance of his doom. When he was fat enough, they bound him to a cross in the presence of the multitude, danced a solemn dance, then cleft his head with a tomahawk and shot him with arrows. According to one trader, the squaws then cut pieces of flesh from the victim's body, with which they greased their hoes; but this was denied by another trader who had been present at the ceremony. Immediately after the sacrifice the people proceeded to plant their fields. A particular account has been preserved of the sacrifice of a Sioux girl by the Pawnees in April 1837 or 1838. The girl was fourteen or fifteen years old and had been kept for six months and well treated. Two days before the sacrifice she was led from wigwam to wigwam, accompanied by the whole council of chiefs and warriors. At each lodge she received a small billet of wood and a little paint, which she handed to the warrior next to her. In this way she called at every wigwam, receiving at each the same present of wood and paint. On the twenty-second of April she was taken out to be sacrificed, attended by the warriors, each of whom carried two pieces of wood which he had received from her hands. Her body having been painted half red and half black, she was attached to a sort of gibbet and roasted for some time over a slow fire, then shot to death with arrows. The chief sacrificer next tore out her heart and devoured it. While her flesh was still warm it was cut in small pieces from the bones, put in little baskets, and taken to a neighbouring corn-field. There the head chief took a piece of the flesh from a basket and squeezed a drop of blood upon the newly-deposited grains of corn. His example was followed by the rest, till all the seed had been sprinkled with the blood; it was then covered up with earth. According to one account the body of the victim was reduced to a kind of paste, which was rubbed or sprinkled not only on the maize but also on the potatoes, the beans, and other seeds to fertilise them. By this sacrifice they hoped to obtain plentiful crops.<a href="#note_732" id="noteref_732" name="noteref_732"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">732</span></span></a></p>
					<p>A West African queen used to sacrifice a man and woman in the month of March. They were killed with spades and hoes, and their bodies buried in the middle of a field which had just been tilled.<a href="#note_733" id="noteref_733" name="noteref_733"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">733</span></span></a> At Lagos in Guinea it was the custom annually to impale a young girl alive soon after the spring equinox in order to secure good crops. Along with her were sacrificed sheep and goats, which, with yams, heads of maize, and plantains, were hung on stakes on each side of her. The victims were bred up for the purpose in the king's seraglio, and their minds had been so powerfully wrought upon by the fetish men that they went cheerfully to their fate.<a href="#note_734" id="noteref_734" name="noteref_734"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">734</span></span></a> A similar sacrifice used to be annually offered at Benin, in Guinea.<a href="#note_735" id="noteref_735" name="noteref_735"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">735</span></span></a> The Marimos, a Bechuana tribe, sacrifice a human being for the crops. The victim chosen is generally a short, stout man. He is seized by violence or intoxicated and taken to the fields, where he is killed amongst the wheat to serve as <span class="tei tei-q">“seed”</span> (so they phrase it). After his blood has coagulated in the sun, it is burned along with the frontal bone, the flesh attached to it, and the brain; the ashes are then scattered over the ground to fertilise it. The rest of the body is eaten.<a href="#note_736" id="noteref_736" name="noteref_736"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">736</span></span></a> The Wamegi of the Usagara hills in German East Africa used to offer human sacrifices of a peculiar kind once a year about the time of harvest, which was also the time of sowing; for the Wamegi have two crops annually, one in September and one in February. The festival was usually held in September or October. The victim was a girl who had attained the age of puberty. She was taken to a hill where the festival was to be celebrated, and there she was crushed to death between two branches.<a href="#note_737" id="noteref_737" name="noteref_737"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">737</span></span></a> The sacrifice was not performed in the fields, and my informant could not ascertain its object, but we may conjecture that it was to ensure good crops in the following year.</p>
					<p>The Bagobos of Mindanao, one of the Philippine Islands, offer a human sacrifice before they sow their rice. The victim is a slave, who is hewn to pieces in the forest.<a href="#note_738" id="noteref_738" name="noteref_738"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">738</span></span></a> The natives of Bontoc, a province in the interior of Luzon, one of the Philippine Islands, are passionate head-hunters. Their principal seasons for head-hunting are the times of planting and reaping the rice. In order that the crop may turn out well, every farm must get at least one human head at planting and one at sowing. The head-hunters go out in twos or threes, lie in wait for the victim, whether man or woman, cut off his or her head, hands, and feet, and bring them back in haste to the village, where they are received with great rejoicings. The skulls are at first exposed on the branches of two or three dead trees which stand in an open space of every village surrounded by large stones which serve as seats. The people then dance round them and feast and get drunk. When the flesh has decayed from the head, the man who cut it off takes it home and preserves it as a relic, while his companions do the same with the hands and the feet.<a href="#note_739" id="noteref_739" name="noteref_739"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">739</span></span></a> Similar customs are observed by the Apoyaos, another tribe in the interior of Luzon.<a href="#note_740" id="noteref_740" name="noteref_740"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">740</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The Wild Wa, an agricultural tribe on the north-eastern frontier of Upper Burma, still hunt for human heads as a means of promoting the welfare of the crops. The Wa regards his skulls as a protection against the powers of evil. <span class="tei tei-q">“Without a skull his crops would fail; without a skull his kine might die; without a skull the father and mother spirits would be shamed and might be enraged; if there were no protecting skull the other spirits who are all malignant, might gain entrance and kill the inhabitants, or drink all the liquor.”</span> The Wa country is a series of mountain ranges shelving rapidly down to narrow valleys from two to five thousand feet deep. The villages are all perched high on the slopes, some just under the crest of the ridge, some lower down on a small projecting spur of flat ground. Industrious cultivation has cleared away the jungle, and the villages stand out conspicuously in the landscape as yellowish-brown blotches on the hillsides. Each village is fortified by an earthen rampart so thickly overgrown with cactuses and other shrubs as to be impenetrable. The only entrance is through a narrow, low and winding tunnel, the floor of which, for additional security, is thickly studded with pegs to wound the feet of enemies who might attempt to force a way in. The Wa depend for their subsistence mainly on their crops of buckwheat, beans, and maize; rice they cultivate only to distil a strong spirituous liquor from it. They had need be industrious, for no field can be reached without a climb up or down the steep mountain-side. Sometimes the rice-fields lie three thousand feet or more below the village, and they require constant attention. But the chief crop raised by the Wa is the poppy, from which they make opium. In February and March the hill-tops for miles are white with the blossom, and you may travel for days through nothing but fields of poppies. Then, too, is the proper season for head-hunting. It opens in March and lasts through April. Parties of head-hunters at that time go forth to prowl for human prey. As a rule they will not behead people of a neighbouring village nor even of any village on the same range of hills. To find victims they go to the next range or at any rate to a distance, and the farther the better, for the heads of strangers are preferred. The reason is that the ghosts of strangers, being unfamiliar with the country, are much less likely to stray away from their skulls; hence they make more vigilant sentinels than the ghosts of people better acquainted with the neighbourhood, who are apt to go off duty without waiting for the tedious formality of relieving guard. When head-hunters return to a village with human heads, the rejoicing is uproarious. Then the great drum is beaten frantically, and its deep hollow boom resounding far and wide through the hills announces to the neighbourhood the glad tidings of murder successfully perpetrated. Then the barrels, or rather the bamboos, of rice-spirit are tapped, and while the genial stream flows and the women and children dance and sing for glee, the men drink themselves blind and mad drunk. The ghastly head, which forms the centre of all this rejoicing, is first taken to the spirit-house, a small shed which usually stands on the highest point of the village site. There, wrapt in grass or leaves, it is hung up in a basket to ripen and bleach. When all the flesh and sinews have mouldered away and nothing remains but the blanched and grinning skull, it is put to rest in the village Golgotha. This is an avenue of huge old trees, whose interlacing boughs form a verdant archway overhead and, with the dense undergrowth, cast a deep shadow on the ground below. Every village has such an avenue stretching along the hillside sometimes for a long distance, or even till it meets the avenue of the neighbouring village. In the solemn gloom of this verdurous canopy is the Place of Skulls. On one side of the avenue stands a row of wooden posts, usually mere trunks of trees with the bark peeled off, but sometimes rudely carved and painted with designs in red and black. A little below the top of each post is cut a niche, and in front of the niche is a ledge. On this ledge the skull is deposited, sometimes so that it is in full view of passers-by in the avenue, sometimes so that it only grins at them through a slit. Most villages count their skulls by tens or twenties, but some of them have hundreds of these trophies, especially when the avenue forms an unbroken continuity of shade between the villages. The old skulls ensure peace to the village, but at least one new one should be taken every year, that the rice may grow green far down in the depths of the valley, that the maize may tinge with its golden hue the steep mountain-sides, and that the hilltops may be white for miles and miles with the bloom of the poppy.<a href="#note_741" id="noteref_741" name="noteref_741"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">741</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The Shans of Indo-China still believe in the efficacy of human sacrifice to procure a good harvest, though they act on the belief less than some other tribes of this region. Their practice now is to poison somebody at the state festival, which is generally held at some time between March and May.<a href="#note_742" id="noteref_742" name="noteref_742"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">742</span></span></a> Among the Lhota Naga, one of the many savage tribes who inhabit the deep rugged labyrinthine glens which wind into the mountains from the rich valley of Brahmapootra,<a href="#note_743" id="noteref_743" name="noteref_743"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">743</span></span></a> it used to be a common custom to chop off the heads, hands, and feet of people they met with, and then to stick up the severed extremities in their fields to ensure a good crop of grain. They bore no ill-will whatever to the persons upon whom they operated in this unceremonious fashion. Once they flayed a boy alive, carved him in pieces, and distributed the flesh among all the villagers, who put it into their corn-bins to avert bad luck and ensure plentiful crops of grain. The Angami, another tribe of the same region, used also to relieve casual passers-by of their heads, hands, and feet, with the same excellent intention.<a href="#note_744" id="noteref_744" name="noteref_744"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">744</span></span></a> The hill tribe Kudulu, near Vizagapatam in the Madras Presidency, offered human sacrifices to the god Jankari for the purpose of obtaining good crops. The ceremony was generally performed on the Sunday before or after the Pongal feast. For the most part the victim was purchased, and until the time for the sacrifice came he was free to wander about the village, to eat and drink what he liked, and even to lie with any woman he met. On the appointed day he was carried before the idol drunk; and when one of the villagers had cut a hole in his stomach and smeared the blood on the idol, the crowds from the neighbouring villages rushed upon him and hacked him to pieces. All who were fortunate enough to secure morsels of his flesh carried them away and presented them to their village idols.<a href="#note_745" id="noteref_745" name="noteref_745"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">745</span></span></a> The Gonds of India, a Dravidian race, kidnapped Brahman boys, and kept them as victims to be sacrificed on various occasions. At sowing and reaping, after a triumphal procession, one of the lads was slain by being punctured with a poisoned arrow. His blood was then sprinkled over the ploughed field or the ripe crop, and his flesh was devoured.<a href="#note_746" id="noteref_746" name="noteref_746"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">746</span></span></a> The Oraons or Uraons of Chota Nagpur worship a goddess called Anna Kuari, who can give good crops and make a man rich, but to induce her to do so it is necessary to offer human sacrifices. In spite of the vigilance of the British Government these sacrifices are said to be still secretly perpetrated. The victims are poor waifs and strays whose disappearance attracts no notice. April and May are the months when the catchpoles are out on the prowl. At that time strangers will not go about the country alone, and parents will not let their children enter the jungle or herd the cattle. When a catchpole has found a victim, he cuts his throat and carries away the upper part of the ring finger and the nose. The goddess takes up her abode in the house of any man who has offered her a sacrifice, and from that time his fields yield a double harvest. The form she assumes in the house is that of a small child. When the householder brings in his unhusked rice, he takes the goddess and rolls her over the heap to double its size. But she soon grows restless and can only be pacified with the blood of fresh human victims.<a href="#note_747" id="noteref_747" name="noteref_747"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">747</span></span></a></p>
					<p>But the best known case of human sacrifices, systematically offered to ensure good crops, is supplied by the Khonds or Kandhs, another Dravidian race in Bengal. Our knowledge of them is derived from the accounts written by British officers who, about the middle of the nineteenth century, were engaged in putting them down.<a href="#note_748" id="noteref_748" name="noteref_748"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">748</span></span></a> The sacrifices were offered to the Earth Goddess, Tari Pennu or Bera Pennu, and were believed to ensure good crops and immunity from all disease and accidents. In particular, they were considered necessary in the cultivation of turmeric, the Khonds arguing that the turmeric could not have a deep red colour without the shedding of blood.<a href="#note_749" id="noteref_749" name="noteref_749"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">749</span></span></a> The victim or Meriah, as he was called, was acceptable to the goddess only if he had been purchased, or had been born a victim—that is, the son of a victim father, or had been devoted as a child by his father or guardian. Khonds in distress often sold their children for victims, <span class="tei tei-q">“considering the beatification of their souls certain, and their death, for the benefit of mankind, the most honourable possible.”</span> A man of the Panua tribe was once seen to load a Khond with curses, and finally to spit in his face, because the Khond had sold for a victim his own child, whom the Panua had wished to marry. A party of Khonds, who saw this, immediately pressed forward to comfort the seller of his child, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Your child has died that all the world may live, and the Earth Goddess herself will wipe that spittle from your face.”</span><a href="#note_750" id="noteref_750" name="noteref_750"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">750</span></span></a> The victims were often kept for years before they were sacrificed. Being regarded as consecrated beings, they were treated with extreme affection, mingled with deference, and were welcomed wherever they went. A Meriah youth, on attaining maturity, was generally given a wife, who was herself usually a Meriah or victim; and with her he received a portion of land and farm-stock. Their offspring were also victims. Human sacrifices were offered to the Earth Goddess by tribes, branches of tribes, or villages, both at periodical festivals and on extraordinary occasions. The periodical sacrifices were generally so arranged by tribes and divisions of tribes that each head of a family was enabled, at least once a year, to procure a shred of flesh for his fields, generally about the time when his chief crop was laid down.<a href="#note_751" id="noteref_751" name="noteref_751"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">751</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The mode of performing these tribal sacrifices was as follows. Ten or twelve days before the sacrifice, the victim was devoted by cutting off his hair, which, until then, had been kept unshorn. Crowds of men and women assembled to witness the sacrifice; none might be excluded, since the sacrifice was declared to be for all mankind. It was preceded by several days of wild revelry and gross debauchery.<a href="#note_752" id="noteref_752" name="noteref_752"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">752</span></span></a> On the day before the sacrifice the victim, dressed in a new garment, was led forth from the village in solemn procession, with music and dancing, to the Meriah grove, a clump of high forest trees standing a little way from the village and untouched by the axe. There they tied him to a post, which was sometimes placed between two plants of the sankissar shrub. He was then anointed with oil, ghee, and turmeric, and adorned with flowers; and <span class="tei tei-q">“a species of reverence, which it is not easy to distinguish from adoration,”</span> was paid to him throughout the day. A great struggle now arose to obtain the smallest relic from his person; a particle of the turmeric paste with which he was smeared, or a drop of his spittle, was esteemed of sovereign virtue, especially by the women.<a href="#note_753" id="noteref_753" name="noteref_753"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">753</span></span></a> The crowd danced round the post to music, and, addressing the earth, said, <span class="tei tei-q">“O God, we offer this sacrifice to you; give us good crops, seasons, and health”</span>; then speaking to the victim they said, <span class="tei tei-q">“We bought you with a price, and did not seize you; now we sacrifice you according to custom, and no sin rests with us.”</span><a href="#note_754" id="noteref_754" name="noteref_754"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">754</span></span></a></p>
					<p>On the last morning the orgies, which had been scarcely interrupted during the night, were resumed, and continued till noon, when they ceased, and the assembly proceeded to consummate the sacrifice. The victim was again anointed with oil, and each person touched the anointed part, and wiped the oil on his own head. In some places they took the victim in procession round the village, from door to door, where some plucked hair from his head, and others begged for a drop of his spittle, with which they anointed their heads.<a href="#note_755" id="noteref_755" name="noteref_755"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">755</span></span></a> As the victim might not be bound nor make any show of resistance, the bones of his arms and, if necessary, his legs were broken; but often this precaution was rendered unnecessary by stupefying him with opium.<a href="#note_756" id="noteref_756" name="noteref_756"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">756</span></span></a> The mode of putting him to death varied in different places. One of the commonest modes seems to have been strangulation, or squeezing to death. The branch of a green tree was cleft several feet down the middle; the victim's neck (in other places, his chest) was inserted in the cleft, which the priest, aided by his assistants, strove with all his force to close.<a href="#note_757" id="noteref_757" name="noteref_757"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">757</span></span></a> Then he wounded the victim slightly with his axe, whereupon the crowd rushed at the wretch and hewed the flesh from the bones, leaving the head and bowels untouched. Sometimes he was cut up alive.<a href="#note_758" id="noteref_758" name="noteref_758"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">758</span></span></a> In Chinna Kimedy he was dragged along the fields, surrounded by the crowd, who, avoiding his head and intestines, hacked the flesh from his body with their knives till he died.<a href="#note_759" id="noteref_759" name="noteref_759"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">759</span></span></a> Another very common mode of sacrifice in the same district was to fasten the victim to the proboscis of a wooden elephant, which revolved on a stout post, and, as it whirled round, the crowd cut the flesh from the victim while life remained. In some villages Major Campbell found as many as fourteen of these wooden elephants, which had been used at sacrifices.<a href="#note_760" id="noteref_760" name="noteref_760"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">760</span></span></a> In one district the victim was put to death slowly by fire. A low stage was formed, sloping on either side like a roof; upon it they laid the victim, his limbs wound round with cords to confine his struggles. Fires were then lighted and hot brands applied, to make him roll up and down the slopes of the stage as long as possible; for the more tears he shed the more abundant would be the supply of rain. Next day the body was cut to pieces.<a href="#note_761" id="noteref_761" name="noteref_761"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">761</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The flesh cut from the victim was instantly taken home by the persons who had been deputed by each village to bring it. To secure its rapid arrival, it was sometimes forwarded by relays of men, and conveyed with postal fleetness fifty or sixty miles.<a href="#note_762" id="noteref_762" name="noteref_762"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">762</span></span></a> In each village all who stayed at home fasted rigidly until the flesh arrived. The bearer deposited it in the place of public assembly, where it was received by the priest and the heads of families. The priest divided it into two portions, one of which he offered to the Earth Goddess by burying it in a hole in the ground with his back turned, and without looking. Then each man added a little earth to bury it, and the priest poured water on the spot from a hill gourd. The other portion of flesh he divided into as many shares as there were heads of houses present. Each head of a house rolled his shred of flesh in leaves, and buried it in his favourite field, placing it in the earth behind his back without looking.<a href="#note_763" id="noteref_763" name="noteref_763"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">763</span></span></a> In some places each man carried his portion of flesh to the stream which watered his fields, and there hung it on a pole.<a href="#note_764" id="noteref_764" name="noteref_764"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">764</span></span></a> For three days thereafter no house was swept; and, in one district, strict silence was observed, no fire might be given out, no wood cut, and no strangers received. The remains of the human victim (namely, the head, bowels, and bones) were watched by strong parties the night after the sacrifice; and next morning they were burned, along with a whole sheep, on a funeral pile. The ashes were scattered over the fields, laid as paste over the houses and granaries, or mixed with the new corn to preserve it from insects.<a href="#note_765" id="noteref_765" name="noteref_765"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">765</span></span></a> Sometimes, however, the head and bones were buried, not burnt.<a href="#note_766" id="noteref_766" name="noteref_766"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">766</span></span></a> After the suppression of the human sacrifices, inferior victims were substituted in some places; for instance, in the capital of Chinna Kimedy a goat took the place of a human victim.<a href="#note_767" id="noteref_767" name="noteref_767"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">767</span></span></a> Others sacrifice a buffalo. They tie it to a wooden post in a sacred grove, dance wildly round it with brandished knives, then, falling on the living animal, hack it to shreds and tatters in a few minutes, fighting and struggling with each other for every particle of flesh. As soon as a man has secured a piece he makes off with it at full speed to bury it in his fields, according to ancient custom, before the sun has set, and as some of them have far to go they must run very fast. All the women throw clods of earth at the rapidly retreating figures of the men, some of them taking very good aim. Soon the sacred grove, so lately a scene of tumult, is silent and deserted except for a few people who remain to guard all that is left of the buffalo, to wit, the head, the bones, and the stomach, which are burned with ceremony at the foot of the stake.<a href="#note_768" id="noteref_768" name="noteref_768"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">768</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In these Khond sacrifices the Meriahs are represented by our authorities as victims offered to propitiate the Earth Goddess. But from the treatment of the victims both before and after death it appears that the custom cannot be explained as merely a propitiatory sacrifice. A part of the flesh certainly was offered to the Earth Goddess, but the rest was buried by each householder in his fields, and the ashes of the other parts of the body were scattered over the fields, laid as paste on the granaries, or mixed with the new corn. These latter customs imply that to the body of the Meriah there was ascribed a direct or intrinsic power of making the crops to grow, quite independent of the indirect efficacy which it might have as an offering to secure the good-will of the deity. In other words, the flesh and ashes of the victim were believed to be endowed with a magical or physical power of fertilising the land. The same intrinsic power was ascribed to the blood and tears of the Meriah, his blood causing the redness of the turmeric and his tears producing rain; for it can hardly be doubted that, originally at least, the tears were supposed to bring down the rain, not merely to prognosticate it. Similarly the custom of pouring water on the buried flesh of the Meriah was no doubt a rain-charm. Again, magical power as an attribute of the Meriah appears in the sovereign virtue believed to reside in anything that came from his person, as his hair or spittle. The ascription of such power to the Meriah indicates that he was much more than a mere man sacrificed to propitiate a deity. Once more, the extreme reverence paid him points to the same conclusion. Major Campbell speaks of the Meriah as <span class="tei tei-q">“being regarded as something more than mortal,”</span><a href="#note_769" id="noteref_769" name="noteref_769"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">769</span></span></a> and Major Macpherson says, <span class="tei tei-q">“A species of reverence, which it is not easy to distinguish from adoration, is paid to him.”</span><a href="#note_770" id="noteref_770" name="noteref_770"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">770</span></span></a> In short, the Meriah seems to have been regarded as divine. As such, he may originally have represented the Earth Goddess or, perhaps, a deity of vegetation; though in later times he came to be regarded rather as a victim offered to a deity than as himself an incarnate god. This later view of the Meriah as a victim rather than a divinity may perhaps have received undue emphasis from the European writers who have described the Khond religion. Habituated to the later idea of sacrifice as an offering made to a god for the purpose of conciliating his favour, European observers are apt to interpret all religious slaughter in this sense, and to suppose that wherever such slaughter takes place, there must necessarily be a deity to whom the carnage is believed by the slayers to be acceptable. Thus their preconceived ideas may unconsciously colour and warp their descriptions of savage rites.</p>
					<p>The same custom of killing the representative of a god, of which strong traces appear in the Khond sacrifices, may perhaps be detected in some of the other human sacrifices described above. Thus the ashes of the slaughtered Marimo were scattered over the fields; the blood of the Brahman lad was put on the crop and field; the flesh of the slain Naga was stowed in the corn-bin; and the blood of the Sioux girl was allowed to trickle on the seed.<a href="#note_771" id="noteref_771" name="noteref_771"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">771</span></span></a> Again, the identification of the victim with the corn, in other words, the view that he is an embodiment or spirit of the corn, is brought out in the pains which seem to be taken to secure a physical correspondence between him and the natural object which he embodies or represents. Thus the Mexicans killed young victims for the young corn and old ones for the ripe corn; the Marimos sacrifice, as <span class="tei tei-q">“seed,”</span> a short, fat man, the shortness of his stature corresponding to that of the young corn, his fatness to the condition which it is desired that the crops may attain; and the Pawnees fattened their victims probably with the same view. Again, the identification of the victim with the corn comes out in the African custom of killing him with spades and hoes, and the Mexican custom of grinding him, like corn, between two stones.</p>
					<p>One more point in these savage customs deserves to be noted. The Pawnee chief devoured the heart of the Sioux girl, and the Marimos and Gonds ate the victim's flesh. If, as we suppose, the victim was regarded as divine, it follows that in eating his flesh his worshippers believed themselves to be partaking of the body of their god.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 4. The Corn-spirit slain in his Human Representatives.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>The barbarous rites just described offer analogies to the harvest customs of Europe. Thus the fertilising virtue ascribed to the corn-spirit is shewn equally in the savage custom of mixing the victim's blood or ashes with the seed-corn and the European custom of mixing the grain from the last sheaf with the young corn in spring.<a href="#note_772" id="noteref_772" name="noteref_772"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">772</span></span></a> Again, the identification of the person with the corn appears alike in the savage custom of adapting the age and stature of the victim to the age and stature, whether actual or expected, of the crop; in the Scotch and Styrian rules that when the corn-spirit is conceived as the Maiden the last corn shall be cut by a young maiden, but when it is conceived as the Corn-mother it shall be cut by an old woman;<a href="#note_773" id="noteref_773" name="noteref_773"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">773</span></span></a> in the Lothringian warning given to old women to save themselves when the Old Woman is being killed, that is, when the last corn is being threshed;<a href="#note_774" id="noteref_774" name="noteref_774"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">774</span></span></a> and in the Tyrolese expectation that if the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is tall, the next year's corn will be tall also.<a href="#note_775" id="noteref_775" name="noteref_775"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">775</span></span></a> Further, the same identification is implied in the savage custom of killing the representative of the corn-spirit with hoes or spades or by grinding him between stones, and in the European custom of pretending to kill him with the scythe or the flail. Once more the Khond custom of pouring water on the buried flesh of the victim is parallel to the European customs of pouring water on the personal representative of the corn-spirit or plunging him into a stream.<a href="#note_776" id="noteref_776" name="noteref_776"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">776</span></span></a> Both the Khond and the European customs are rain-charms.</p>
					<p>To return now to the Lityerses story. It has been shewn that in rude society human beings have been commonly killed to promote the growth of the crops. There is therefore no improbability in the supposition that they may once have been killed for a like purpose in Phrygia and Europe; and when Phrygian legend and European folk-custom, closely agreeing with each other, point to the conclusion that men were so slain, we are bound, provisionally at least, to accept the conclusion. Further, both the Lityerses story and European harvest-customs agree in indicating that the victim was put to death as a representative of the corn-spirit, and this indication is in harmony with the view which some savages appear to take of the victim slain to make the crops flourish. On the whole, then, we may fairly suppose that both in Phrygia and in Europe the representative of the corn-spirit was annually killed upon the harvest-field. Grounds have been already shewn for believing that similarly in Europe the representative of the tree-spirit was annually slain. The proofs of these two remarkable and closely analogous customs are entirely independent of each other. Their coincidence seems to furnish fresh presumption in favour of both.</p>
					<p>To the question, How was the representative of the corn-spirit chosen? one answer has been already given. Both the Lityerses story and European folk-custom shew that passing strangers were regarded as manifestations of the corn-spirit escaping from the cut or threshed corn, and as such were seized and slain. But this is not the only answer which the evidence suggests. According to the Phrygian legend the victims of Lityerses were not simply passing strangers, but persons whom he had vanquished in a reaping contest and afterwards wrapt up in corn-sheaves and beheaded.<a href="#note_777" id="noteref_777" name="noteref_777"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">777</span></span></a> This suggests that the representative of the corn-spirit may have been selected by means of a competition on the harvest-field, in which the vanquished competitor was compelled to accept the fatal honour. The supposition is countenanced by European harvest-customs. We have seen that in Europe there is sometimes a contest amongst the reapers to avoid being last, and that the person who is vanquished in this competition, that is, who cuts the last corn, is often roughly handled. It is true we have not found that a pretence is made of killing him; but on the other hand we have found that a pretence is made of killing the man who gives the last stroke at threshing, that is, who is vanquished in the threshing contest.<a href="#note_778" id="noteref_778" name="noteref_778"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">778</span></span></a> Now, since it is in the character of representative of the corn-spirit that the thresher of the last corn is slain in mimicry, and since the same representative character attaches (as we have seen) to the cutter and binder as well as to the thresher of the last corn, and since the same repugnance is evinced by harvesters to be last in any one of these labours, we may conjecture that a pretence has been commonly made of killing the reaper and binder as well as the thresher of the last corn, and that in ancient times this killing was actually carried out. This conjecture is corroborated by the common superstition that whoever cuts the last corn must die soon.<a href="#note_779" id="noteref_779" name="noteref_779"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">779</span></span></a> Sometimes it is thought that the person who binds the last sheaf on the field will die in the course of next year.<a href="#note_780" id="noteref_780" name="noteref_780"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">780</span></span></a> The reason for fixing on the reaper, binder, or thresher of the last corn as the representative of the corn-spirit may be this. The corn-spirit is supposed to lurk as long as he can in the corn, retreating before the reapers, the binders, and the threshers at their work. But when he is forcibly expelled from his refuge in the last corn cut or the last sheaf bound or the last grain threshed, he necessarily assumes some other form than that of the corn-stalks which had hitherto been his garment or body. And what form can the expelled corn-spirit assume more naturally than that of the person who stands nearest to the corn from which he (the corn-spirit) has just been expelled? But the person in question is necessarily the reaper, binder, or thresher of the last corn. He or she, therefore, is seized and treated as the corn-spirit himself.</p>
					<p>Thus the person who was killed on the harvest-field as the representative of the corn-spirit may have been either a passing stranger or the harvester who was last at reaping, binding, or threshing. But there is a third possibility, to which ancient legend and modern folk-custom alike point. Lityerses not only put strangers to death; he was himself slain, and apparently in the same way as he had slain others, namely, by being wrapt in a corn-sheaf, beheaded, and cast into the river; and it is implied that this happened to Lityerses on his own land.<a href="#note_781" id="noteref_781" name="noteref_781"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">781</span></span></a> Similarly in modern harvest-customs the pretence of killing appears to be carried out quite as often on the person of the master (farmer or squire) as on that of strangers.<a href="#note_782" id="noteref_782" name="noteref_782"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">782</span></span></a> Now when we remember that Lityerses was said to have been a son of the King of Phrygia, and that in one account he is himself called a king, and when we combine with this the tradition that he was put to death, apparently as a representative of the corn-spirit, we are led to conjecture that we have here another trace of the custom of annually slaying one of those divine or priestly kings who are known to have held ghostly sway in many parts of Western Asia and particularly in Phrygia. The custom appears, as we have seen,<a href="#note_783" id="noteref_783" name="noteref_783"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">783</span></span></a> to have been so far modified in places that the king's son was slain in the king's stead. Of the custom thus modified the story of Lityerses would be, in one version at least, a reminiscence.</p>
					<p>Turning now to the relation of the Phrygian Lityerses to the Phrygian Attis, it may be remembered that at Pessinus—the seat of a priestly kingship—the high-priest appears to have been annually slain in the character of Attis, a god of vegetation, and that Attis was described by an ancient authority as <span class="tei tei-q">“a reaped ear of corn.”</span><a href="#note_784" id="noteref_784" name="noteref_784"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">784</span></span></a> Thus Attis, as an embodiment of the corn-spirit, annually slain in the person of his representative, might be thought to be ultimately identical with Lityerses, the latter being simply the rustic prototype out of which the state religion of Attis was developed. It may have been so; but, on the other hand, the analogy of European folk-custom warns us that amongst the same people two distinct deities of vegetation may have their separate personal representatives, both of whom are slain in the character of gods at different times of the year. For in Europe, as we have seen, it appears that one man was commonly slain in the character of the tree-spirit in spring, and another in the character of the corn-spirit in autumn. It may have been so in Phrygia also. Attis was especially a tree-god, and his connexion with corn may have been only such an extension of the power of a tree-spirit as is indicated in customs like the Harvest-May.<a href="#note_785" id="noteref_785" name="noteref_785"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">785</span></span></a> Again, the representative of Attis appears to have been slain in spring; whereas Lityerses must have been slain in summer or autumn, according to the time of the harvest in Phrygia.<a href="#note_786" id="noteref_786" name="noteref_786"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">786</span></span></a> On the whole, then, while we are not justified in regarding Lityerses as the prototype of Attis, the two may be regarded as parallel products of the same religious idea, and may have stood to each other as in Europe the Old Man of harvest stands to the Wild Man, the Leaf Man, and so forth, of spring. Both were spirits or deities of vegetation, and the personal representatives of both were annually slain. But whereas the Attis worship became elevated into the dignity of a State religion and spread to Italy, the rites of Lityerses seem never to have passed the limits of their native Phrygia, and always retained their character of rustic ceremonies performed by peasants on the harvest-field. At most a few villages may have clubbed together, as amongst the Khonds, to procure a human victim to be slain as representative of the corn-spirit for their common benefit. Such victims may have been drawn from the families of priestly kings or kinglets, which would account for the legendary character of Lityerses as the son of a Phrygian king or as himself a king. When villages did not so club together, each village or farm may have procured its own representative of the corn-spirit by dooming to death either a passing stranger or the harvester who cut, bound, or threshed the last sheaf. Perhaps in the olden time the practice of head-hunting as a means of promoting the growth of the corn may have been as common among the rude inhabitants of Europe and Western Asia as it still is, or was till lately, among the primitive agricultural tribes of Assam, Burma, the Philippine Islands, and the Indian Archipelago.<a href="#note_787" id="noteref_787" name="noteref_787"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">787</span></span></a> It is hardly necessary to add that in Phrygia, as in Europe, the old barbarous custom of killing a man on the harvest-field or the threshing-floor had doubtless passed into a mere pretence long before the classical era, and was probably regarded by the reapers and threshers themselves as no more than a rough jest which the license of a harvest-home permitted them to play off on a passing stranger, a comrade, or even on their master himself.<a href="#note_788" id="noteref_788" name="noteref_788"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">788</span></span></a></p>
					<p>I have dwelt on the Lityerses song at length because it affords so many points of comparison with European and savage folk-custom. The other harvest songs of Western Asia and Egypt, to which attention has been called above,<a href="#note_789" id="noteref_789" name="noteref_789"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">789</span></span></a> may now be dismissed much more briefly. The similarity of the Bithynian Bormus<a href="#note_790" id="noteref_790" name="noteref_790"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">790</span></span></a> to the Phrygian Lityerses helps to bear out the interpretation which has been given of the latter. Bormus, whose death or rather disappearance was annually mourned by the reapers in a plaintive song, was, like Lityerses, a king's son or at least the son of a wealthy and distinguished man. The reapers whom he watched were at work on his own fields, and he disappeared in going to fetch water for them; according to one version of the story he was carried off by the nymphs, doubtless the nymphs of the spring or pool or river whither he went to draw water.<a href="#note_791" id="noteref_791" name="noteref_791"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">791</span></span></a> Viewed in the light of the Lityerses story and of European folk-custom, this disappearance of Bormus may be a reminiscence of the custom of binding the farmer himself in a corn-sheaf and throwing him into the water. The mournful strain which the reapers sang was probably a lamentation over the death of the corn-spirit, slain either in the cut corn or in the person of a human representative; and the call which they addressed to him may have been a prayer that he might return in fresh vigour next year.</p>
					<p>The Phoenician Linus song was sung at the vintage, at least in the west of Asia Minor, as we learn from Homer; and this, combined with the legend of Syleus, suggests that in ancient times passing strangers were handled by vintagers and vine-diggers in much the same way as they are said to have been handled by the reaper Lityerses. The Lydian Syleus, so ran the legend, compelled passers-by to dig for him in his vineyard, till Hercules came and killed him and dug up his vines by the roots.<a href="#note_792" id="noteref_792" name="noteref_792"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">792</span></span></a> This seems to be the outline of a legend like that of Lityerses; but neither ancient writers nor modern folk-custom enable us to fill in the details.<a href="#note_793" id="noteref_793" name="noteref_793"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">793</span></span></a> But, further, the Linus song was probably sung also by Phoenician reapers, for Herodotus compares it to the Maneros song, which, as we have seen, was a lament raised by Egyptian reapers over the cut corn. Further, Linus was identified with Adonis, and Adonis has some claims to be regarded as especially a corn-deity.<a href="#note_794" id="noteref_794" name="noteref_794"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">794</span></span></a> Thus the Linus lament, as sung at harvest, would be identical with the Adonis lament; each would be the lamentation raised by reapers over the dead spirit of the corn. But whereas Adonis, like Attis, grew into a stately figure of mythology, adored and mourned in splendid cities far beyond the limits of his Phoenician home, Linus appears to have remained a simple ditty sung by reapers and vintagers among the corn-sheaves and the vines. The analogy of Lityerses and of folk-custom, both European and savage, suggests that in Phoenicia the slain corn-spirit—the dead Adonis—may formerly have been represented by a human victim; and this suggestion is possibly supported by the Harran legend that Tammuz (Adonis) was slain by his cruel lord, who ground his bones in a mill and scattered them to the wind. For in Mexico, as we have seen, the human victim at harvest was crushed between two stones; and both in Africa and India the ashes or other remains of the victim were scattered over the fields.<a href="#note_795" id="noteref_795" name="noteref_795"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">795</span></span></a> But the Harran legend may be only a mythical way of expressing the grinding of corn in the mill and the scattering of the seed. It seems worth suggesting that the mock king who was annually killed at the Babylonian festival of the Sacaea on the sixteenth day of the month Lous may have represented Tammuz himself. For the historian Berosus, who records the festival and its date, probably used the Macedonian calendar, since he dedicated his history to Antiochus Soter; and in his day the Macedonian month Lous appears to have corresponded to the Babylonian month Tammuz.<a href="#note_796" id="noteref_796" name="noteref_796"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">796</span></span></a> If this conjecture is right, the view that the mock king at the Sacaea was slain in the character of a god would be established. But to this point we shall return later on.</p>
					<p>There is a good deal more evidence that in Egypt the slain corn-spirit—the dead Osiris—was represented by a human victim, whom the reapers slew on the harvest-field, mourning his death in a dirge, to which the Greeks, through a verbal misunderstanding, gave the name of Maneros.<a href="#note_797" id="noteref_797" name="noteref_797"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">797</span></span></a> For the legend of Busiris seems to preserve a reminiscence of human sacrifices once offered by the Egyptians in connexion with the worship of Osiris. Busiris was said to have been an Egyptian king who sacrificed all strangers on the altar of Zeus. The origin of the custom was traced to a dearth which afflicted the land of Egypt for nine years. A Cyprian seer informed Busiris that the dearth would cease if a man were annually sacrificed to Zeus. So Busiris instituted the sacrifice. But when Hercules came to Egypt, and was being dragged to the altar to be sacrificed, he burst his bonds and slew Busiris and his son.<a href="#note_798" id="noteref_798" name="noteref_798"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">798</span></span></a> Here then is a legend that in Egypt a human victim was annually sacrificed to prevent the failure of the crops, and a belief is implied that an omission of the sacrifice would have entailed a recurrence of that infertility which it was the object of the sacrifice to prevent. So the Pawnees, as we have seen, believed that an omission of the human sacrifice at planting would have been followed by a total failure of their crops. The name Busiris was in reality the name of a city, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pe-Asar</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“the house of Osiris,”</span><a href="#note_799" id="noteref_799" name="noteref_799"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">799</span></span></a> the city being so called because it contained the grave of Osiris. Indeed some high modern authorities believe that Busiris was the original home of Osiris, from which his worship spread to other parts of Egypt.<a href="#note_800" id="noteref_800" name="noteref_800"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">800</span></span></a> The human sacrifices were said to have been offered at his grave, and the victims were red-haired men, whose ashes were scattered abroad by means of winnowing-fans.<a href="#note_801" id="noteref_801" name="noteref_801"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">801</span></span></a> This tradition of human sacrifices offered at the tomb of Osiris is confirmed by the evidence of the monuments; for <span class="tei tei-q">“we find in the temple of Dendereh a human figure with a hare's head and pierced with knives, tied to a stake before Osiris Khenti-Amentiu, and Horus is shown in a Ptolemaic sculpture at Karnak killing a bound hare-headed figure before the bier of Osiris, who is represented in the form of Harpocrates. That these figures are really human beings with the head of an animal fastened on is proved by another sculpture at Dendereh, where a kneeling man has the hawk's head and wings over his head and shoulders, and in another place a priest has the jackal's head on his shoulders, his own head appearing through the disguise. Besides, Diodorus tells us that the Egyptian kings in former times had worn on their heads the fore-part of a lion, or of a bull, or of a dragon, showing that this method of disguise or transformation was a well-known custom.”</span><a href="#note_802" id="noteref_802" name="noteref_802"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">802</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In the light of the foregoing discussion the Egyptian tradition of Busiris admits of a consistent and fairly probable explanation. Osiris, the corn-spirit, was annually represented at harvest by a stranger, whose red hair made him a suitable representative of the ripe corn. This man, in his representative character, was slain on the harvest-field, and mourned by the reapers, who prayed at the same time that the corn-spirit might revive and return (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mââ-ne-rha</span></span>, Maneros) with renewed vigour in the following year. Finally, the victim, or some part of him, was burned, and the ashes scattered by winnowing-fans over the fields to fertilise them. Here the choice of the victim on the ground of his resemblance to the corn which he was to represent agrees with the Mexican and African customs already described.<a href="#note_803" id="noteref_803" name="noteref_803"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">803</span></span></a> Similarly the woman who died in the character of the Corn-mother at the Mexican midsummer sacrifice had her face painted red and yellow in token of the colours of the corn, and she wore a pasteboard mitre surmounted by waving plumes in imitation of the tassel of the maize.<a href="#note_804" id="noteref_804" name="noteref_804"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">804</span></span></a> On the other hand, at the festival of the Goddess of the White Maize the Mexicans sacrificed lepers.<a href="#note_805" id="noteref_805" name="noteref_805"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">805</span></span></a> The Romans sacrificed red-haired puppies in spring to avert the supposed blighting influence of the Dog-star, believing that the crops would thus grow ripe and ruddy.<a href="#note_806" id="noteref_806" name="noteref_806"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">806</span></span></a> The heathen of Harran offered to the sun, moon, and planets human victims who were chosen on the ground of their supposed resemblance to the heavenly bodies to which they were sacrificed; for example, the priests, clothed in red and smeared with blood, offered a red-haired, red-cheeked man to <span class="tei tei-q">“the red planet Mars”</span> in a temple which was painted red and draped with red hangings.<a href="#note_807" id="noteref_807" name="noteref_807"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">807</span></span></a> These and the like cases of assimilating the victim to the god, or to the natural phenomenon which he represents, are based ultimately on the principle of homoeopathic or imitative magic, the notion being that the object aimed at will be most readily attained by means of a sacrifice which resembles the effect that it is designed to bring about.</p>
					<p>Again, the scattering of the Egyptian victim's ashes over the fields resembles the Marimo and Khond custom,<a href="#note_808" id="noteref_808" name="noteref_808"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">808</span></span></a> and the use of winnowing-fans for the purpose is another hint of his identification with the corn. So in Vendée a pretence is made of threshing and winnowing the farmer's wife, regarded as an embodiment of the corn-spirit; in Mexico the victim was ground between stones; and in Africa he was slain with spades and hoes.<a href="#note_809" id="noteref_809" name="noteref_809"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">809</span></span></a> The story that the fragments of Osiris's body were scattered up and down the land, and buried by Isis on the spots where they lay,<a href="#note_810" id="noteref_810" name="noteref_810"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">810</span></span></a> may very well be a reminiscence of a custom, like that observed by the Khonds, of dividing the human victim in pieces and burying the pieces, often at intervals of many miles from each other, in the fields.<a href="#note_811" id="noteref_811" name="noteref_811"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">811</span></span></a> However, it is possible that the story of the dismemberment of Osiris, like the similar story told of Tammuz, may have been simply a mythical expression for the scattering of the seed. Once more, the legend that the body of Osiris enclosed in a coffer was thrown by Typhon into the Nile, perhaps points to a custom of casting the body of the victim, or at least a portion of it, into the Nile as a rain-charm, or rather to make the river rise. For a similar purpose Phrygian reapers seem to have flung the headless bodies of their victims, wrapt in corn-sheaves, into a river, and the Khonds poured water on the buried flesh of the human victim. Probably when Osiris ceased to be represented by a human victim, an image of him was annually thrown into the Nile, just as the effigy of his Syrian counterpart, Adonis, used to be cast into the sea at Alexandria. Or water may have been simply poured over it, as on the monument already mentioned<a href="#note_812" id="noteref_812" name="noteref_812"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">812</span></span></a> a priest is seen pouring water over the body of Osiris, from which corn-stalks are sprouting. The accompanying legend, <span class="tei tei-q">“This is Osiris of the mysteries, who springs from the returning waters,”</span> bears out the view that at the mysteries of Osiris a charm to make rain fall or the river rise was regularly wrought by pouring water on his effigy or flinging it into the Nile.</p>
					<p>It may be objected that the red-haired victims were slain as representatives, not of Osiris, but of his enemy Typhon; for the victims were called Typhonian, and red was the colour of Typhon, black the colour of Osiris.<a href="#note_813" id="noteref_813" name="noteref_813"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">813</span></span></a> The answer to this objection must be reserved for the present. Meantime it may be pointed out that if Osiris is often represented on the monuments as black, he is still more commonly depicted as green,<a href="#note_814" id="noteref_814" name="noteref_814"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">814</span></span></a> appropriately enough for a corn-god, who may be conceived as black while the seed is under ground, but as green after it has sprouted. So the Greeks recognised both a Green and a Black Demeter,<a href="#note_815" id="noteref_815" name="noteref_815"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">815</span></span></a> and sacrificed to the Green Demeter in spring with mirth and gladness.<a href="#note_816" id="noteref_816" name="noteref_816"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">816</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Thus, if I am right, the key to the mysteries of Osiris is furnished by the melancholy cry of the Egyptian reapers, which down to Roman times could be heard year after year sounding across the fields, announcing the death of the corn-spirit, the rustic prototype of Osiris. Similar cries, as we have seen, were also heard on all the harvest-fields of Western Asia. By the ancients they are spoken of as songs; but to judge from the analysis of the names Linus and Maneros, they probably consisted only of a few words uttered in a prolonged musical note which could be heard for a great distance. Such sonorous and long-drawn cries, raised by a number of strong voices in concert, must have had a striking effect, and could hardly fail to arrest the attention of any wayfarer who happened to be within hearing. The sounds, repeated again and again, could probably be distinguished with tolerable ease even at a distance; but to a Greek traveller in Asia or Egypt the foreign words would commonly convey no meaning, and he might take them, not unnaturally, for the name of some one (Maneros, Linus, Lityerses, Bormus) upon whom the reapers were calling. And if his journey led him through more countries than one, as Bithynia and Phrygia, or Phoenicia and Egypt, while the corn was being reaped, he would have an opportunity of comparing the various harvest cries of the different peoples. Thus we can readily understand why these harvest cries were so often noted and compared with each other by the Greeks. Whereas, if they had been regular songs, they could not have been heard at such distances, and therefore could not have attracted the attention of so many travellers; and, moreover, even if the wayfarer were within hearing of them, he could not so easily have picked out the words.</p>
					<p>Down to recent times Devonshire reapers uttered cries of the same sort, and performed on the field a ceremony exactly analogous to that in which, if I am not mistaken, the rites of Osiris originated. The cry and the ceremony are thus described by an observer who wrote in the first half of the nineteenth century. <span class="tei tei-q">“After the wheat is all cut, on most farms in the north of Devon, the harvest people have a custom of <span class="tei tei-q">‘crying the neck.’</span> I believe that this practice is seldom omitted on any large farm in that part of the country. It is done in this way. An old man, or some one else well acquainted with the ceremonies used on the occasion (when the labourers are reaping the last field of wheat), goes round to the shocks and sheaves, and picks out a little bundle of all the best ears he can find; this bundle he ties up very neat and trim, and plats and arranges the straws very tastefully. This is called <span class="tei tei-q">‘the neck’</span> of wheat, or wheaten-ears. After the field is cut out, and the pitcher once more circulated, the reapers, binders, and the women stand round in a circle. The person with <span class="tei tei-q">‘the neck’</span> stands in the centre, grasping it with both his hands. He first stoops and holds it near the ground, and all the men forming the ring take off their hats, stooping and holding them with both hands towards the ground. They then all begin at once in a very prolonged and harmonious tone to cry <span class="tei tei-q">‘The neck!’</span> at the same time slowly raising themselves upright, and elevating their arms and hats above their heads; the person with <span class="tei tei-q">‘the neck’</span> also raising it on high. This is done three times. They then change their cry to <span class="tei tei-q">‘Wee yen!’</span>—<span class="tei tei-q">‘Way yen!’</span>—which they sound in the same prolonged and slow manner as before, with singular harmony and effect, three times. This last cry is accompanied by the same movements of the body and arms as in crying <span class="tei tei-q">‘the neck.’</span>... After having thus repeated <span class="tei tei-q">‘the neck’</span> three times, and <span class="tei tei-q">‘wee yen,’</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">‘way yen’</span> as often, they all burst out into a kind of loud and joyous laugh, flinging up their hats and caps into the air, capering about and perhaps kissing the girls. One of them then gets 'the neck' and runs as hard as he can down to the farmhouse, where the dairymaid, or one of the young female domestics, stands at the door prepared with a pail of water. If he who holds <span class="tei tei-q">‘the neck’</span> can manage to get into the house, in any way unseen, or openly, by any other way than the door at which the girl stands with the pail of water, then he may lawfully kiss her; but, if otherwise, he is regularly soused with the contents of the bucket. On a fine still autumn evening the <span class="tei tei-q">‘crying of the neck’</span> has a wonderful effect at a distance, far finer than that of the Turkish muezzin, which Lord Byron eulogises so much, and which he says is preferable to all the bells in Christendom. I have once or twice heard upwards of twenty men cry it, and sometimes joined by an equal number of female voices. About three years back, on some high grounds, where our people were harvesting, I heard six or seven <span class="tei tei-q">‘necks’</span> cried in one night, although I know that some of them were four miles off. They are heard through the quiet evening air at a considerable distance sometimes.”</span><a href="#note_817" id="noteref_817" name="noteref_817"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">817</span></span></a> Again, Mrs. Bray tells how, travelling in Devonshire, <span class="tei tei-q">“she saw a party of reapers standing in a circle on a rising ground, holding their sickles aloft. One in the middle held up some ears of corn tied together with flowers, and the party shouted three times (what she writes as) <span class="tei tei-q">‘Arnack, arnack, arnack, we <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">haven</span></span>, we <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">haven</span></span>, we <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">haven</span></span>.’</span> They went home, accompanied by women and children carrying boughs of flowers, shouting and singing. The manservant who attended Mrs. Bray said <span class="tei tei-q">‘it was only the people making their games, as they always did, <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">to the spirit of harvest</span></em>.’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_818" id="noteref_818" name="noteref_818"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">818</span></span></a> Here, as Miss Burne remarks, <span class="tei tei-q">“ <span class="tei tei-q">‘arnack, we haven!’</span> is obviously in the Devon dialect, <span class="tei tei-q">‘a neck (or nack)! we have un!’</span> ”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“The neck”</span> is generally hung up in the farmhouse, where it sometimes remains for two or three years.<a href="#note_819" id="noteref_819" name="noteref_819"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">819</span></span></a> A similar custom is still observed in some parts of Cornwall, as I was told by my lamented friend J. H. Middleton. <span class="tei tei-q">“The last sheaf is decked with ribbons. Two strong-voiced men are chosen and placed (one with the sheaf) on opposite sides of a valley. One shouts, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I've gotten it.’</span> The other shouts, <span class="tei tei-q">‘What hast gotten?’</span> The first answers, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I'se gotten the neck.’</span> ”</span><a href="#note_820" id="noteref_820" name="noteref_820"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">820</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Another account of this old custom, written at Truro in 1839, runs thus: <span class="tei tei-q">“Now, when all the corn was cut at Heligan, the farming men and maidens come in front of the house, and bring with them a small sheaf of corn, the last that has been cut, and this is adorned with ribbons and flowers, and one part is tied quite tight, so as to look like a neck. Then they cry out <span class="tei tei-q">‘Our (my) side, my side,’</span> as loud as they can; then the dairymaid gives the neck to the head farming-man. He takes it, and says, very loudly three times, <span class="tei tei-q">‘I have him, I have him, I have him.’</span> Then another farming-man shouts very loudly, <span class="tei tei-q">‘What have ye? what have ye? what have ye?’</span> Then the first says, <span class="tei tei-q">‘A neck, a neck, a neck.’</span> And when he has said this, all the people make a very great shouting. This they do three times, and after one famous shout go away and eat supper, and dance, and sing songs.”</span><a href="#note_821" id="noteref_821" name="noteref_821"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">821</span></span></a> According to another account, <span class="tei tei-q">“all went out to the field when the last corn was cut, the <span class="tei tei-q">‘neck’</span> was tied with ribbons and plaited, and they danced round it, and carried it to the great kitchen, where by-and-by the supper was. The words were as given in the previous account, and <span class="tei tei-q">‘Hip, hip, hack, heck, I have 'ee, I have 'ee, I have 'ee.’</span> It was hung up in the hall.”</span> Another account relates that one of the men rushed from the field with the last sheaf, while the rest pursued him with vessels of water, which they tried to throw over the sheaf before it could be brought into the barn.<a href="#note_822" id="noteref_822" name="noteref_822"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">822</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Similar customs appear to have been formerly observed in Pembrokeshire, as appears from the following account, in which, however, nothing is said of the sonorous cries raised by the reapers when their work was done: <span class="tei tei-q">“At harvest-time, in South Pembrokeshire, the last ears of corn left standing in the field were tied together, and the harvesters then tried to cut this neck by throwing their hatchets at it. What happened afterwards appears to have varied somewhat. I have been told by one old man that the one who got possession of the neck would carry it over into some neighbouring field, leave it there, and take to his heels as fast as he could; for, if caught, he had a rough time of it. The men who caught him would shut him up in a barn without food, or belabour him soundly, or perhaps shoe him, as it was called, beating the soles of his feet with rods—a very severe and much-dreaded punishment. On my grandfather's farm the man used to make for the house as fast as possible, and try to carry in the neck. The maids were on the look-out for him, and did their best to drench him with water. If they succeeded, they got the present of half-a-crown, which my grandfather always gave, and which was considered a very liberal present indeed. If the man was successful in dodging the maids, and getting the neck into the house without receiving the wetting, the half-crown became his. The neck was then hung up, and kept until the following year, at any rate, like the bunches of flowers or boughs gathered at the St. Jean, in the south of France. Sometimes the necks of many successive years were to be found hanging up together. In these two ways of disposing of the neck one sees the embodiment, no doubt, of the two ways of looking at the corn-spirit, as good (to be kept) or as bad (to be passed on to the neighbour).”</span><a href="#note_823" id="noteref_823" name="noteref_823"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">823</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In the foregoing customs a particular bunch of ears, generally the last left standing,<a href="#note_824" id="noteref_824" name="noteref_824"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">824</span></span></a> is conceived as the neck of the corn-spirit, who is consequently beheaded when the bunch is cut down. Similarly in Shropshire the name <span class="tei tei-q">“neck,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“the gander's neck,”</span> used to be commonly given to the last handful of ears left standing in the middle of the field when all the rest of the corn was cut. It was plaited together, and the reapers, standing ten or twenty paces off, threw their sickles at it. Whoever cut it through was said to have cut off the gander's neck. The <span class="tei tei-q">“neck”</span> was taken to the farmer's wife, who was supposed to keep it in the house for good luck till the next harvest came round.<a href="#note_825" id="noteref_825" name="noteref_825"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">825</span></span></a> Near Trèves, the man who reaps the last standing corn <span class="tei tei-q">“cuts the goat's neck off.”</span><a href="#note_826" id="noteref_826" name="noteref_826"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">826</span></span></a> At Faslane, on the Gareloch (Dumbartonshire), the last handful of standing corn was sometimes called the <span class="tei tei-q">“head.”</span><a href="#note_827" id="noteref_827" name="noteref_827"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">827</span></span></a> At Aurich, in East Friesland, the man who reaps the last corn <span class="tei tei-q">“cuts the hare's tail off.”</span><a href="#note_828" id="noteref_828" name="noteref_828"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">828</span></span></a> In mowing down the last corner of a field French reapers sometimes call out, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have the cat by the tail.”</span><a href="#note_829" id="noteref_829" name="noteref_829"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">829</span></span></a> In Bresse (Bourgogne) the last sheaf represented the fox. Beside it a score of ears were left standing to form the tail, and each reaper, going back some paces, threw his sickle at it. He who succeeded in severing it <span class="tei tei-q">“cut off the fox's tail,”</span> and a cry of <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">You cou cou!</span></span>”</span> was raised in his honour.<a href="#note_830" id="noteref_830" name="noteref_830"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">830</span></span></a> These examples leave no room to doubt the meaning of the Devonshire and Cornish expression <span class="tei tei-q">“the neck,”</span> as applied to the last sheaf. The corn-spirit is conceived in human or animal form, and the last standing corn is part of its body—its neck, its head, or its tail. Sometimes, as we have seen, the last corn is regarded as the navel-string.<a href="#note_831" id="noteref_831" name="noteref_831"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">831</span></span></a> Lastly, the Devonshire custom of drenching with water the person who brings in <span class="tei tei-q">“the neck”</span> is a rain-charm, such as we have had many examples of. Its parallel in the mysteries of Osiris was the custom of pouring water on the image of Osiris or on the person who represented him.</p>
					<p>In Germany cries of <i xml:lang="de">Waul!</i> or <i xml:lang="de">Wol!</i> or <i xml:lang="de">Wôld!</i> are sometimes raised by the reapers at cutting the last corn. Thus in some places the last patch of standing rye was called the <i xml:lang="de">Waul</i>-rye; a stick decked with flowers was inserted in it, and the ears were fastened to the stick. Then all the reapers took off their hats and cried thrice, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="de">Waul!</i> <i xml:lang="de">Waul!</i> <i xml:lang="de">Waul!</i>”</span> Sometimes they accompanied the cry by clashing with their whetstones on their scythes.<a href="#note_832" id="noteref_832" name="noteref_832"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">832</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
