<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc9" name="toc9"/>
				<a id="pdf10" name="pdf10"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter IV. Woman's Part in Primitive Agriculture.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>If Demeter was indeed a personification of the corn, it is natural to ask, why did the Greeks personify the corn as a goddess rather than a god? why did they ascribe the origin of agriculture to a female rather than to a male power? They conceived the spirit of the vine as masculine; why did they conceive the spirit of the barley and wheat as feminine? To this it has been answered that the personification of the corn as feminine, or at all events the ascription of the discovery of agriculture to a goddess, was suggested by the prominent part which women take in primitive agriculture.<a href="#note_355" id="noteref_355" name="noteref_355"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">355</span></span></a> The theory illustrates a recent tendency of mythologists to explain many myths as reflections of primitive society rather than as personifications of nature. For that reason, apart from its intrinsic interest, the theory deserves to be briefly considered.</p>
				<p>Before the invention of the plough, which can hardly be worked without resort to the labour of men, it was and still is customary in many parts of the world to break up the soil for cultivation with hoes, and among not a few savage peoples to this day the task of hoeing the ground and sowing the seed devolves mainly or entirely upon the women, while the men take little or no part in cultivation beyond clearing the land by felling the forest trees and burning the fallen timber and brushwood which encumber the soil. Thus, for example, among the Zulus, <span class="tei tei-q">“when a piece of land has been selected for cultivation, the task of clearing it <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page114">[pg 114]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg114" name="Pg114"/> belongs to the men. If the ground be much encumbered, this becomes a laborious undertaking, for their axe is very small, and when a large tree has to be encountered, they can only lop the branches; fire is employed when it is needful to remove the trunk. The reader will therefore not be surprised that the people usually avoid bush-land, though they seem to be aware of its superior fertility. As a general rule the men take no further share in the labour of cultivation; and, as the site chosen is seldom much encumbered and frequently bears nothing but grass, their part of the work is very slight. The women are the real labourers; for (except in some particular cases) the entire business of digging, planting, and weeding devolves on them; and, if we regard the assagai and shield as symbolical of the man, the hoe may be looked upon as emblematic of the woman.... With this rude and heavy instrument the woman digs, plants, and weeds her garden. Digging and sowing are generally one operation, which is thus performed; the seed is first scattered on the ground, when the soil is dug or picked up with the hoe, to the depth of three or four inches, the larger roots and tufts of grass being gathered out, but all the rest left in or on the ground.”</span><a href="#note_356" id="noteref_356" name="noteref_356"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">356</span></span></a> A special term of contempt is applied to any Zulu man, who, deprived of the services of his wife and family, is compelled by hard necessity to handle the hoe himself.<a href="#note_357" id="noteref_357" name="noteref_357"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">357</span></span></a> Similarly among the Baronga of Delagoa Bay, <span class="tei tei-q">“when the rains begin to fall, sometimes as early as September but generally later, they hasten to sow. With her hoe in her hands, the mistress of the field walks with little steps; every time she lifts a clod of earth well broken up, and in the hole thus made she plants three or four grains of maize and covers them up. If she has not finished clearing all the patch of the bush which she contemplated, she proceeds to turn up again the fields she tilled last year. The crop will be less abundant than in virgin soil, but they plant three or four years successively in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page115">[pg 115]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg115" name="Pg115"/> same field before it is exhausted. As for enriching the soil with manure, they never think of it.”</span><a href="#note_358" id="noteref_358" name="noteref_358"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">358</span></span></a> Among the Barotsé, who cultivate millet, maize, and peas to a small extent and in a rudimentary fashion, women alone are occupied with the field-work, and their only implement is a spade or hoe.<a href="#note_359" id="noteref_359" name="noteref_359"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">359</span></span></a> Of the Matabelé we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“most of the hard work is performed by the women; the whole of the cultivation is done by them. They plough with short spades of native manufacture; they sow the fields, and they clear them of weeds.”</span><a href="#note_360" id="noteref_360" name="noteref_360"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">360</span></span></a> Among the Awemba, to the west of Lake Tanganyika, the bulk of the work in the plantations falls on the women; in particular the men refuse to hoe the ground. They have a saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Is not each male child born for the axe and each female child for the hoe?”</span><a href="#note_361" id="noteref_361" name="noteref_361"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">361</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The natives of the Tanganyika plateau <span class="tei tei-q">“cultivate the banana, and have a curious custom connected with it. No man is permitted to sow; but when the hole is prepared a little girl is carried to the spot on a man's shoulders. She first throws into the hole a sherd of broken pottery, and then scatters the seed over it.”</span><a href="#note_362" id="noteref_362" name="noteref_362"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">362</span></span></a> The reason of the latter practice has been explained by more recent observers of these natives. <span class="tei tei-q">“Young children, it may here be noted, are often employed to administer drugs, remedies, even the Poison Ordeal, and to sow the first seeds. Such acts, the natives say, must be performed by chaste and innocent hands, lest a contaminated touch should destroy the potency of the medicine or of the seedlings planted. It used to be a very common sight upon the islands of Lake Bangweolo to watch how a Bisa woman would solve the problem of her own moral unfitness by carrying her baby-girl to the banana-plot, and inserting seedlings in the tiny hands for dropping into the holes already prepared.”</span><a href="#note_363" id="noteref_363" name="noteref_363"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">363</span></span></a> Similarly among the people of the Lower Congo <span class="tei tei-q">“women must remain chaste while planting pumpkin and calabash seeds, they are not allowed to touch any pig-meat, and they must wash their <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page116">[pg 116]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg116" name="Pg116"/> hands before touching the seeds. If a woman does not observe all these rules, she must not plant the seeds, or the crop will be bad; she may make the holes, and her baby girl, or another who has obeyed the restrictions, can drop in the seeds and cover them over.”</span><a href="#note_364" id="noteref_364" name="noteref_364"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">364</span></span></a> We can now perhaps understand why Attic matrons had to observe strict chastity when they celebrated the festival of the Thesmophoria.<a href="#note_365" id="noteref_365" name="noteref_365"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">365</span></span></a> In Attica that festival was held in honour of Demeter in the month of Pyanepsion, corresponding to October,<a href="#note_366" id="noteref_366" name="noteref_366"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">366</span></span></a> the season of the autumn sowing; and the rites included certain ceremonies which bore directly on the quickening of the seed.<a href="#note_367" id="noteref_367" name="noteref_367"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">367</span></span></a> We may conjecture that the rule of chastity imposed on matrons at this festival was a relic of a time when they too, like many savage women down to the present time, discharged the important duty of sowing the seed and were bound for that reason to observe strict continence, lest any impurity on their part should defile the seed and prevent it from bearing fruit.</p>
				<p>Of the Caffres of South Africa in general we read that <span class="tei tei-q">“agriculture is mainly the work of the women, for in olden days the men were occupied in hunting and fighting. The women do but scratch the land with hoes, sometimes using long-handled instruments, as in Zululand, and sometimes short-handled ones, as above the Zambesi. When the ground is thus prepared, the women scatter the seed, throwing it over the soil quite at random. They know the time to sow by the position of the constellations, chiefly by that of the Pleiades. They date their new year from the time they can see this constellation just before sunrise.”</span><a href="#note_368" id="noteref_368" name="noteref_368"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">368</span></span></a> In Basutoland, where <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page117">[pg 117]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg117" name="Pg117"/> the women also till the fields, though the lands of chiefs are dug and sowed by men, an attempt is made to determine the time of sowing by observation of the moon, but the people generally find themselves out in their reckoning, and after much dispute are forced to fall back upon the state of the weather and of vegetation as better evidence of the season of sowing. Intelligent chiefs rectify the calendar at the summer solstice, which they call the summer-house of the sun.<a href="#note_369" id="noteref_369" name="noteref_369"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">369</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the Nandi of British East Africa <span class="tei tei-q">“the rough work of clearing the bush for plantations is performed by the men, after which nearly all work in connexion with them is done by the women. The men, however, assist in sowing the seed, and in harvesting some of the crops. As a rule trees are not felled, but the bark is stripped off for about four feet from the ground and the trees are then left to die. The planting is mostly, if not entirely, done during the first half of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Kiptamo</span></span> moon (February), which is the first month of the year, and when the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Iwat-kut</span></span> moon rises (March) all seed should be in the ground. The chief medicine man is consulted before the planting operations begin, but the Nandi know by the arrival in the fields of the guinea-fowl, whose song is supposed to be, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">O-kol, o-kol; mi-i tokoch</span></span> (Plant, plant; there is luck in it), that the planting season is at hand. When the first seed is sown, salt is mixed with it, and the sower sings mournfully: <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ak o-siek-u o-chok-chi</span></span> (And grow quickly), as he sows. After fresh ground has been cleared, eleusine grain is planted. This crop is generally repeated the second year, after which millet is sown, and finally sweet potatoes or some other product. Most fields are allowed to lie fallow every fourth or fifth year. The Nandi manure their plantations with turf ashes.... The eleusine crops are harvested by both men and women. All other crops are reaped by the women only, who are at times assisted by the children. The corn is pounded and winnowed by the women and girls.”</span><a href="#note_370" id="noteref_370" name="noteref_370"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">370</span></span></a> Among <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page118">[pg 118]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg118" name="Pg118"/> the Suk and En-jemusi of British East Africa it is the women who cultivate the fields and milk the cows.<a href="#note_371" id="noteref_371" name="noteref_371"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">371</span></span></a> Among the Wadowe of German East Africa the men clear the forest and break up the hard ground, but the women sow and reap the crops.<a href="#note_372" id="noteref_372" name="noteref_372"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">372</span></span></a> So among the Wanyamwezi, who are an essentially agricultural people, to the south of Lake Victoria Nyanza, the men cut down the bush and hoe the hard ground, but leave the rest of the labour of weeding, sowing, and reaping to the women.<a href="#note_373" id="noteref_373" name="noteref_373"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">373</span></span></a> The Baganda of Central Africa subsist chiefly on bananas, and among them <span class="tei tei-q">“the garden and its cultivation have always been the woman's department. Princesses and peasant women alike looked upon cultivation as their special work; the garden with its produce was essentially the wife's domain, and she would under no circumstances allow her husband to do any digging or sowing in it. No woman would remain with a man who did not give her a garden and a hoe to dig it with; if these were denied her, she would seek an early opportunity to escape from her husband and return to her relations to complain of her treatment, and to obtain justice or a divorce. When a man married he sought a plot of land for his wife in order that she might settle to work and provide food for the household.... In initial clearing of the land it was customary for the husband to take part; he cut down the tall grass and shrubs, and so left the ground ready for his wife to begin her digging. The grass and the trees she heaped up and burned, reserving only so much as she needed for firewood. A hoe was the only implement used in cultivation; the blade was heart-shaped with a prong at the base, by which it was fastened to the handle. The hoe-handle was never more than two feet long, so that a woman had to stoop when using it.”</span><a href="#note_374" id="noteref_374" name="noteref_374"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">374</span></span></a> In Kiziba, a district immediately to the south of Uganda, the tilling of the soil is exclusively the work of the women. They turn up the soil with hoes, make holes in the ground with digging-sticks or their fingers, and drop a few seeds into <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page119">[pg 119]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg119" name="Pg119"/> each hole.<a href="#note_375" id="noteref_375" name="noteref_375"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">375</span></span></a> Among the Niam-Niam of Central Africa <span class="tei tei-q">“the men most studiously devote themselves to their hunting, and leave the culture of the soil to be carried on exclusively by the women”</span>;<a href="#note_376" id="noteref_376" name="noteref_376"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">376</span></span></a> and among the Monbuttoo of the same region in like manner, <span class="tei tei-q">“whilst the women attend to the tillage of the soil and the gathering of the harvest, the men, unless they are absent either for war or hunting, spend the entire day in idleness.”</span><a href="#note_377" id="noteref_377" name="noteref_377"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">377</span></span></a> As to the Bangala of the Upper Congo we read that <span class="tei tei-q">“large farms were made around the towns. The men did the clearing of the bush, felling the trees, and cutting down the undergrowth; the women worked with them, heaping up the grass and brushwood ready for burning, and helping generally. As a rule the women did the hoeing, planting, and weeding, but the men did not so despise this work as never to do it.”</span> In this tribe <span class="tei tei-q">“the food belonged to the woman who cultivated the farm, and while she supplied her husband with the vegetable food, he had to supply the fish and meat and share them with his wife or wives.”</span><a href="#note_378" id="noteref_378" name="noteref_378"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">378</span></span></a> Amongst the Tofoke, a tribe of the Congo State on the equator, all the field labour, except the clearing away of the forest, is performed by the women. They dig the soil with a hoe and plant maize and manioc. A field is used only once.<a href="#note_379" id="noteref_379" name="noteref_379"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">379</span></span></a> So with the Ba-Mbala, a Bantu tribe between the rivers Inzia and Kwilu, the men clear the ground for cultivation, but all the rest of the work of tillage falls to the women, whose only tool is an iron hoe. Fresh ground is cleared for cultivation every year.<a href="#note_380" id="noteref_380" name="noteref_380"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">380</span></span></a> The Mpongwe of the Gaboon, in West Africa, cultivate manioc (cassava), maize, yams, plantains, sweet potatoes, and ground nuts. When new clearings have to be made in the forest, the men cut down and burn the trees, and the women put in the crop. The only tool they use is a dibble, with which they turn up a sod, put in a seed, and cover it <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page120">[pg 120]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg120" name="Pg120"/> over.<a href="#note_381" id="noteref_381" name="noteref_381"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">381</span></span></a> Among the Ashira of the same region the cultivation of the soil is in the hands of the women.<a href="#note_382" id="noteref_382" name="noteref_382"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">382</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A similar division of labour between men and women prevails among many primitive agricultural tribes of Indians in South America. <span class="tei tei-q">“In the interior of the villages,”</span> says an eminent authority on aboriginal South America, <span class="tei tei-q">“the man often absents himself to hunt or to go into the heart of the forest in search of the honey of the wild bees, and he always goes alone. He fells the trees in the places where he wishes to make a field for cultivation, he fashions his weapons, he digs out his canoe, while the woman rears the children, makes the garments, busies herself with the interior, cultivates the field, gathers the fruits, collects the roots, and prepares the food. Such is, generally at least, the respective condition of the two sexes among almost all the Americans. The Peruvians alone had already, in their semi-civilised state, partially modified these customs; for among them the man shared the toils of the other sex or took on himself the most laborious tasks.”</span><a href="#note_383" id="noteref_383" name="noteref_383"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">383</span></span></a> Thus, to take examples, among the Caribs of the West Indies the men used to fell the trees and leave the fallen trunks to cumber the ground, burning off only the smaller boughs. Then the women came and planted manioc, potatoes, yams, and bananas wherever they found room among the tree-trunks. In digging the ground to receive the seed or the shoots they did not use hoes but simply pointed sticks. The men, we are told, would rather have died of hunger than undertake such agricultural labours.<a href="#note_384" id="noteref_384" name="noteref_384"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">384</span></span></a> Again, the staple vegetable food of the Indians of British Guiana is cassava bread, made from the roots of the manioc or cassava plant, which the Indians cultivate in clearings of the forest. The men fell the trees, cut down the undergrowth, and in dry weather set fire to the fallen lumber, thus creating open patches in the forest which are covered with white ashes. When the rains <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page121">[pg 121]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg121" name="Pg121"/> set in, the women repair to these clearings, heavily laden with baskets full of cassava sticks to be used as cuttings. These they insert at irregular intervals in the soil, and so the field is formed. While the cassava is growing, the women do just as much weeding as is necessary to prevent the cultivated plants from being choked by the rank growth of the tropical vegetation, and in doing so they plant bananas, pumpkin seeds, yams, sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, red and yellow peppers, and so forth, wherever there is room for them. At last in the ninth or tenth month, when the seeds appearing on the straggling branches of the cassava plants announce that the roots are ripe, the women cut down the plants and dig up the roots, not all at once, but as they are required. These roots they afterwards peel, scrape, and bake into cassava bread.<a href="#note_385" id="noteref_385" name="noteref_385"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">385</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In like manner the cassava or manioc plant is cultivated generally among all the Indian tribes of tropical South America, wherever the plant will grow; and the cultivation of it is altogether in the hands of the women, who insert the sticks in the ground after the fashion already described.<a href="#note_386" id="noteref_386" name="noteref_386"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">386</span></span></a> For example, among the tribes of the Uaupes River, in the upper valley of the Amazon, who are an agricultural people with settled abodes, <span class="tei tei-q">“the men cut down the trees and brushwood, which, after they have lain some months to dry, are burnt; and the mandiocca is then planted by the women, together with little patches of cane, sweet potatoes, and various fruits. The women also dig up the mandiocca, and prepare from it the bread which is their main subsistence.... The bread is made fresh every day, as when it gets cold and dry it is far less palatable. The women thus have plenty to do, for every other day at least they have to go to the field, often a mile or two distant, to fetch the root, and every day to grate, prepare, and bake the bread; as it forms by far the greater part of their food, and they often pass days without eating anything else, especially <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page122">[pg 122]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg122" name="Pg122"/> when the men are engaged in clearing the forest.”</span><a href="#note_387" id="noteref_387" name="noteref_387"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">387</span></span></a> Among the Tupinambas, a tribe of Brazilian Indians, the wives <span class="tei tei-q">“had something more than their due share of labour, but they were not treated with brutality, and their condition was on the whole happy. They set and dug the mandioc; they sowed and gathered the maize. An odd superstition prevailed, that if a sort of earth-almond, which the Portugueze call <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">amendoens</span></span>, was planted by the men, it would not grow.”</span><a href="#note_388" id="noteref_388" name="noteref_388"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">388</span></span></a> Similar accounts appear to apply to the Brazilian Indians in general: the men occupy themselves with hunting, war, and the manufacture of their weapons, while the women plant and reap the crops, and search for fruits in the forest;<a href="#note_389" id="noteref_389" name="noteref_389"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">389</span></span></a> above all they cultivate the manioc, scraping the soil clear of weeds with pointed sticks and inserting the shoots in the earth.<a href="#note_390" id="noteref_390" name="noteref_390"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">390</span></span></a> Similarly among the Indians of Peru, who cultivate maize in clearings of the forest, the cultivation of the fields is left to the women, while the men hunt with bows and arrows and blowguns in the woods, often remaining away from home for weeks or even months together.<a href="#note_391" id="noteref_391" name="noteref_391"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">391</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A similar distribution of labour between the sexes prevails among some savage tribes in other parts of the world. Thus among the Lhoosai of south-eastern India the men employ themselves chiefly in hunting or in making forays on their weaker neighbours, but they clear the ground and help to carry home the harvest. However, the main burden of the bodily labour by which life is supported falls on the women; they fetch water, hew wood, cultivate the ground, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page123">[pg 123]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg123" name="Pg123"/> and help to reap the crops.<a href="#note_392" id="noteref_392" name="noteref_392"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">392</span></span></a> Among the Miris of Assam almost the whole of the field work is done by the women. They cultivate a patch of ground for two successive years, then suffer it to lie fallow for four or five. But they are deterred by superstitious fear from breaking new ground so long as the fallow suffices for their needs; they dread to offend the spirits of the woods by needlessly felling the trees. They raise crops of rice, maize, millet, yams, and sweet potatoes. But they seldom possess any implement adapted solely for tillage; they have never taken to the plough nor even to a hoe. They use their long straight swords to clear, cut, and dig with.<a href="#note_393" id="noteref_393" name="noteref_393"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">393</span></span></a> Among the Korwas, a savage hill tribe of Bengal, the men hunt with bows and arrows, while the women till the fields, dig for wild roots, or cull wild vegetables. Their principal crop is pulse (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cajanus Indicus</span></span>).<a href="#note_394" id="noteref_394" name="noteref_394"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">394</span></span></a> Among the Papuans of Ayambori, near Doreh in Dutch New Guinea, it is the men who lay out the fields by felling and burning the trees and brushwood in the forest, and it is they who enclose the fields with fences, but it is the women who sow and reap them and carry home the produce in sacks on their backs. They cultivate rice, millet, and bananas.<a href="#note_395" id="noteref_395" name="noteref_395"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">395</span></span></a> So among the natives of Kaimani Bay in Dutch New Guinea the men occupy themselves only with fishing and hunting, while all the field work falls on the women.<a href="#note_396" id="noteref_396" name="noteref_396"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">396</span></span></a> In the Gazelle Peninsula of New Britain, when the natives have decided to convert a piece of grass-land into a plantation, the men cut down the long grass, burn it, dig up the soil with sharp-pointed sticks, and enclose the land with a fence of saplings. Then the women plant the banana shoots, weed the ground, and in the intervals between the bananas insert slips of yams, sweet potatoes, sugar-cane, or ginger. When the produce is ripe, they carry it to the village. Thus the bulk of the labour of cultivation devolves on the women.<a href="#note_397" id="noteref_397" name="noteref_397"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">397</span></span></a></p>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page124">[pg 124]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg124" name="Pg124"/>
				<p>Among some peoples of the Indian Archipelago, after the land has been cleared for cultivation by the men, the work of planting and sowing is divided between men and women, the men digging holes in the ground with pointed sticks, and the women following them, putting the seeds or shoots into the holes, and then huddling the earth over them; for savages seldom sow broadcast, they laboriously dig holes and insert the seed in them. This division of agricultural labour between the sexes is adopted by various tribes of Celebes, Ceram, Borneo, Nias, and New Guinea.<a href="#note_398" id="noteref_398" name="noteref_398"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">398</span></span></a> Sometimes the custom of entrusting the sowing of the seed to women appears to be influenced by superstitious as well as economic considerations. Thus among the Indians of the Orinoco, who with an infinitude of pains cleared the jungle for cultivation by cutting down the forest trees with their stone axes, burning the fallen lumber, and breaking up the ground with wooden instruments hardened in the fire, the task of sowing the maize and planting the roots was performed by the women alone; and when the Spanish missionaries expostulated with the men for not helping their wives in this toilsome duty, they received for answer that as women knew how to conceive seed and bear children, so the seeds and roots planted by them bore fruit far more abundantly than if they had been planted by male hands.<a href="#note_399" id="noteref_399" name="noteref_399"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">399</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Even among savages who have not yet learned to cultivate any plants the task of collecting the edible seeds and digging up the edible roots of wild plants appears to devolve mainly on women, while the men contribute their share to the common food supply by hunting and fishing, for which their superior strength, agility, and courage especially <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page125">[pg 125]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg125" name="Pg125"/> qualify them. For example, among the Indians of California, who were entirely ignorant of agriculture, the general division of labour between the sexes in the search for food was that the men killed the game and caught the salmon, while the women dug the roots and brought in most of the vegetable food, though the men helped them to gather acorns, nuts, and berries.<a href="#note_400" id="noteref_400" name="noteref_400"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">400</span></span></a> Among the Indians of San Juan Capistrano in California, while the men passed their time in fowling, fishing, dancing, and lounging, <span class="tei tei-q">“the women were obliged to gather seeds in the fields, prepare them for cooking, and to perform all the meanest offices, as well as the most laborious. It was painful in the extreme, to behold them, with their infants hanging upon their shoulders, groping about in search of herbs or seeds, and exposed as they frequently were to the inclemency of the weather.”</span><a href="#note_401" id="noteref_401" name="noteref_401"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">401</span></span></a> Yet these rude savages possessed a calendar containing directions as to the seasons for collecting the different seeds and produce of the earth. The calendar consisted of lunar months corrected by observation of the solstices, <span class="tei tei-q">“for at the conclusion of the moon in December, that is, at the conjunction, they calculated the return of the sun from the tropic of Capricorn; and another year commenced, the Indian saying <span class="tei tei-q">‘the sun has arrived at his home.’</span> ... They observed with greater attention and celebrated with more pomp, the sun's arrival at the tropic of Capricorn than they did his reaching the tropic of Cancer, for the reason, that, as they were situated ten degrees from the latter, they were pleased at the sun's approach towards them; for it returned to ripen their fruits and seeds, to give warmth to the atmosphere, and enliven again the fields with beauty and increase.”</span> However, the knowledge of the calendar was limited to the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">puplem</span></span> or general council of the tribe, who sent criers to make proclamation when the time had come to go forth and gather the seeds and other produce of the earth. In their calculations they were assisted by a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pul</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page126">[pg 126]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg126" name="Pg126"/> astrologer, who observed the aspect of the moon.<a href="#note_402" id="noteref_402" name="noteref_402"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">402</span></span></a> When we consider that these rude Californian savages, destitute alike of agriculture and of the other arts of civilised life, yet succeeded in forming for themselves a calendar based on observation both of the moon and of the sun, we need not hesitate to ascribe to the immeasurably more advanced Greeks at the dawn of history the knowledge of a somewhat more elaborate calendar founded on a cycle of eight solar years.<a href="#note_403" id="noteref_403" name="noteref_403"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">403</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the equally rude aborigines of Australia, to whom agriculture in every form was totally unknown, the division of labour between the sexes in regard to the collection of food appears to have been similar. While the men hunted game, the labour of gathering and preparing the vegetable food fell chiefly to the women. Thus with regard to the Encounter Bay tribe of South Australia we are told that while the men busied themselves, according to the season, either with fishing or with hunting emus, opossums, kangaroos, and so forth, the women and children searched for roots and plants.<a href="#note_404" id="noteref_404" name="noteref_404"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">404</span></span></a> Again, among the natives of Western Australia <span class="tei tei-q">“it is generally considered the province of women to dig roots, and for this purpose they carry a long, pointed stick, which is held in the right hand, and driven firmly into the ground, where it is shaken, so as to loosen the earth, which is scooped up and thrown out with the fingers of the left hand, and in this manner they dig with great rapidity. But the labour, in proportion to the amount obtained, is great. To get a yam about half an inch in circumference and a foot in length, they have to dig a hole above a foot square and two feet in depth; a considerable portion of the time of the women and children is, therefore, passed in this employment. If the men are absent upon any expedition, the females are left in charge of one who is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page127">[pg 127]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg127" name="Pg127"/> old or sick; and in traversing the bush you often stumble on a large party of them, scattered about in the forest, digging roots and collecting the different species of fungus.”</span><a href="#note_405" id="noteref_405" name="noteref_405"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">405</span></span></a> In fertile districts, where the yams which the aborigines use as food grow abundantly, the ground may sometimes be seen riddled with holes made by the women in their search for these edible roots. Thus to quote Sir George Grey: <span class="tei tei-q">“We now crossed the dry bed of a stream, and from that emerged upon a tract of light fertile soil, quite overrun with <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">warran</span></span> [yam] plants, the root of which is a favourite article of food with the natives. This was the first time we had yet seen this plant on our journey, and now for three and a half consecutive miles we traversed a fertile piece of land, literally perforated with the holes the natives had made to dig this root; indeed we could with difficulty walk across it on that account, whilst this tract extended east and west as far as we could see.”</span><a href="#note_406" id="noteref_406" name="noteref_406"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">406</span></span></a> Again, in the valley of the Lower Murray River a kind of yam (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Microseris Forsteri</span></span>) grew plentifully and was easily found in the spring and early summer, when the roots were dug up out of the earth by the women and children. The root is small and of a sweetish taste and grows throughout the greater part of Australia outside the tropics; on the alpine pastures of the high Australian mountains it attains to a much larger size and furnishes a not unpalatable food.<a href="#note_407" id="noteref_407" name="noteref_407"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">407</span></span></a> But the women gather edible herbs and seeds as well as roots; and at evening they may be seen trooping in to the camp, each with a great bundle of sow-thistles, dandelions, or trefoil on her head,<a href="#note_408" id="noteref_408" name="noteref_408"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">408</span></span></a> or carrying wooden vessels filled with seeds, which they afterwards grind up between stones and knead into a paste with water or bake into cakes.<a href="#note_409" id="noteref_409" name="noteref_409"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">409</span></span></a> Among the aborigines of central Victoria, while the men hunted, the women dug up edible <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page128">[pg 128]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg128" name="Pg128"/> roots and gathered succulent vegetables, such as the young tops of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">munya</span></span>, the sow-thistle, and several kinds of fig-marigold. The implement which they used to dig up roots with was a pole seven or eight feet long, hardened in the fire and pointed at the end, which also served them as a weapon both of defence and of offence.<a href="#note_410" id="noteref_410" name="noteref_410"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">410</span></span></a> Among the tribes of Central Australia the principal vegetable food is the seed of a species of Claytonia, called by white men <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">munyeru</span></span>, which the women gather in large quantities and winnow by pouring the little black seeds from one vessel to another so as to let the wind blow the loose husks away.<a href="#note_411" id="noteref_411" name="noteref_411"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">411</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In these customs observed by savages who are totally ignorant of agriculture we may perhaps detect some of the steps by which mankind have advanced from the enjoyment of the wild fruits of the earth to the systematic cultivation of plants. For an effect of digging up the earth in the search for roots has probably been in many cases to enrich and fertilise the soil and so to increase the crop of roots or herbs; and such an increase would naturally attract the natives in larger numbers and enable them to subsist for longer periods on the spot without being compelled by the speedy exhaustion of the crop to shift their quarters and wander away in search of fresh supplies. Moreover, the winnowing of the seeds on ground which had thus been turned up by the digging-sticks of the women would naturally contribute to the same result. For though savages at the level of the Californian Indians and the aborigines of Australia have no idea of using seeds for any purpose but that of immediate consumption, and it has never occurred to them to incur a temporary loss for the sake of a future gain by sowing them in the ground, yet it is almost certain that in the process of winnowing the seeds as a preparation for eating them many of the grains must have escaped and, being wafted by the wind, have fallen on the upturned soil and borne fruit. Thus by the operations of turning up the ground and winnowing the seed, though neither operation <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page129">[pg 129]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg129" name="Pg129"/> aimed at anything beyond satisfying the immediate pangs of hunger, savage man or rather savage woman was unconsciously preparing for the whole community a future and more abundant store of food, which would enable them to multiply and to abandon the old migratory and wasteful manner of life for a more settled and economic mode of existence. So curiously sometimes does man, aiming his shafts at a near but petty mark, hit a greater and more distant target.</p>
				<p>On the whole, then, it appears highly probable that as a consequence of a certain natural division of labour between the sexes women have contributed more than men towards the greatest advance in economic history, namely, the transition from a nomadic to a settled life, from a natural to an artificial basis of subsistence.</p>
				<p>Among the Aryan peoples of Europe the old practice of hoeing the ground as a preparation for sowing appears to have been generally replaced at a very remote period by the far more effective process of ploughing;<a href="#note_412" id="noteref_412" name="noteref_412"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">412</span></span></a> and as the labour of ploughing practically necessitates the employment of masculine strength, it is hardly to be expected that in Europe many traces should remain of the important part formerly played by women in primitive agriculture. However, we are told that among the Iberians of Spain and the Athamanes of Epirus the women tilled the ground,<a href="#note_413" id="noteref_413" name="noteref_413"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">413</span></span></a> and that among the ancient Germans the care of the fields was left to the women and old men.<a href="#note_414" id="noteref_414" name="noteref_414"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">414</span></span></a> But these indications of an age when the cultivation of the ground was committed mainly to feminine hands are few and slight; and if the Greek conception of Demeter as a goddess of corn and agriculture really dates from such an age and was directly suggested by such a division of labour between the sexes, it <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page130">[pg 130]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg130" name="Pg130"/> seems clear that its origin must be sought at a period far back in the history of the Aryan race, perhaps long before the segregation of the Greeks from the common stock and their formation into a separate people. It may be so, but to me I confess that this derivation of the conception appears somewhat far-fetched and improbable; and I prefer to suppose that the idea of the corn as feminine was suggested to the Greek mind, not by the position of women in remote prehistoric ages, but by a direct observation of nature, the teeming head of corn appearing to the primitive fancy to resemble the teeming womb of a woman, and the ripe ear on the stalk being likened to a child borne in the arms or on the back of its mother. At least we know that similar sights suggest similar ideas to some of the agricultural negroes of West Africa. Thus the Hos of Togoland, who plant maize in February and reap it in July, say that the maize is an image of a mother; when the cobs are forming, the mother is binding the infant on her back, but in July she sinks her head and dies and the child is taken away from her, to be afterwards multiplied at the next sowing.<a href="#note_415" id="noteref_415" name="noteref_415"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">415</span></span></a> When the rude aborigines of Western Australia observe that a seed-bearing plant has flowered, they call it the Mother of So-and-so, naming the particular kind of plant, and they will not allow it to be dug up.<a href="#note_416" id="noteref_416" name="noteref_416"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">416</span></span></a> Apparently they think that respect and regard are due to the plant as to a mother and her child. Such simple and natural comparisons, which may occur to men in any age and country, suffice to explain the Greek personification of the corn as mother and daughter, and we need not cast about for more recondite theories. Be that as it may, the conception of the corn as a woman and a mother was certainly not peculiar to the ancient Greeks, but has been shared by them with many other races, as will appear abundantly from the instances which I shall cite in the following chapter.</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page131">[pg 131]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg131" name="Pg131"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
