<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-2-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<a id="toc99" name="toc99"/>
				<a id="pdf100" name="pdf100"/>
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter IV. Human Representatives of Attis.</span>
				</h2>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The high priest of Attis bore the god's name and seems to have personated him. The drawing of the high priest's blood may have been a substitute for putting him to death in the character of the god. The name of Attis in the royal families of Phrygia and Lydia. The Phrygian priests of Attis may have been members of the royal family.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>From inscriptions it appears that both at Pessinus and Rome the high-priest of Cybele regularly bore the name of Attis.<a href="#note_855" id="noteref_855" name="noteref_855"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">855</span></span></a> It is therefore a reasonable conjecture that he played the part of his namesake, the legendary Attis, at the annual festival.<a href="#note_856" id="noteref_856" name="noteref_856"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">856</span></span></a> We have seen that on the Day of Blood he drew blood from his arms, and this may have been an imitation of the self-inflicted death of Attis under the pine-tree. It is not inconsistent with this supposition that Attis was also represented at these ceremonies by an effigy; for instances can be shown in which the divine being is first represented by a living person and afterwards by an effigy, which is then burned or otherwise destroyed.<a href="#note_857" id="noteref_857" name="noteref_857"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">857</span></span></a> Perhaps we may go a step farther and conjecture that this mimic killing of the priest, accompanied by a real effusion of his blood, was in Phrygia, as it has been elsewhere, a substitute for a human sacrifice which in earlier times was actually offered. Sir W. M. Ramsay, whose authority on all questions relating to Phrygia no one will dispute, is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page286">[pg 286]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg286" name="Pg286"/> of opinion that at these Phrygian ceremonies <span class="tei tei-q">“the representative of the god was probably slain each year by a cruel death, just as the god himself died.”</span><a href="#note_858" id="noteref_858" name="noteref_858"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">858</span></span></a> We know from Strabo<a href="#note_859" id="noteref_859" name="noteref_859"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">859</span></span></a> that the priests of Pessinus were at one time potentates as well as priests; they may, therefore, have belonged to that class of divine kings or popes whose duty it was to die each year for their people and the world. The name of Attis, it is true, does not occur among the names of the old kings of Phrygia, who seem to have borne the names of Midas and Gordias in alternate generations; but a very ancient inscription carved in the rock above a famous Phrygian monument, which is known as the Tomb of Midas, records that the monument was made for, or dedicated to, King Midas by a certain Ates, whose name is doubtless identical with Attis, and who, if not a king himself, may have been one of the royal family.<a href="#note_860" id="noteref_860" name="noteref_860"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">860</span></span></a> It is worthy of note also that the name Atys, which, again, appears to be only another form of Attis, is recorded as that of an early king of Lydia;<a href="#note_861" id="noteref_861" name="noteref_861"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">861</span></span></a> and that a son of Croesus, king of Lydia, not only bore the name Atys but was said to have been killed, while he was hunting a boar, by a member of the royal Phrygian family, who traced his lineage to King Midas and had fled to the court of Croesus because he had unwittingly slain his own brother.<a href="#note_862" id="noteref_862" name="noteref_862"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">862</span></span></a> Scholars have recognized in this story of the death of Atys, son of Croesus, a mere double of the myth of Attis;<a href="#note_863" id="noteref_863" name="noteref_863"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">863</span></span></a> and in view of the facts which have come before us in the present inquiry<a href="#note_864" id="noteref_864" name="noteref_864"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">864</span></span></a> it <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page287">[pg 287]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg287" name="Pg287"/> is a remarkable circumstance that the myth of a slain god should be told of a king's son. May we conjecture that the Phrygian priests who bore the name of Attis and represented the god of that name were themselves members, perhaps the eldest sons, of the royal house, to whom their fathers, uncles, brothers, or other kinsmen deputed the honour of dying a violent death in the character of gods, while they reserved to themselves the duty of living, as long as nature allowed them, in the humbler character of kings? If this were so, the Phrygian dynasty of Midas may have presented a close parallel to the Greek dynasty of Athamas, in which the eldest sons seem to have been regularly destined to the altar.<a href="#note_865" id="noteref_865" name="noteref_865"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">865</span></span></a> But it is also possible that the divine priests who bore the name of Attis may have belonged to that indigenous race which the Phrygians, on their irruption into Asia from Europe, appear to have found and conquered in the land afterwards known as Phrygia.<a href="#note_866" id="noteref_866" name="noteref_866"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">866</span></span></a> On the latter hypothesis the priests may have represented an older and higher civilization than that of their barbarous conquerors. Be that as it may, the god they personated was a deity of vegetation whose divine life manifested itself especially in the pine-tree and the violets of spring; and if they died in the character of that divinity, they corresponded to the mummers who are still slain in mimicry by European peasants in spring, and to the priest who was slain long ago in grim earnest on the wooded shore of the Lake of Nemi.</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page288">[pg 288]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg288" name="Pg288"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
