<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc25" name="toc25"/>
				<a id="pdf26" name="pdf26"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter IV. Public Scapegoats.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc27" name="toc27"/>
					<a id="pdf28" name="pdf28"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. The Expulsion of Embodied Evils.</span>
					</h2>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The expulsion of embodied evils.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus far we have dealt with that class of the general expulsion of evils which I have called direct or immediate. In this class the evils are invisible, at least to common eyes, and the mode of deliverance consists for the most part in beating the empty air and raising such a hubbub as may scare the mischievous spirits and put them to flight. It remains to illustrate the second class of expulsions, in which the evil influences are embodied in a visible form or are at least supposed to be loaded upon a material medium, which acts as a vehicle to draw them off from the people, village, or town.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Expulsion of demons personified by men among the American Indians. Expulsion of a demon embodied in an image among the Mayas of Yucatan.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The Pomos of California celebrate an expulsion of devils every seven years, at which the devils are represented by disguised men. <span class="tei tei-q">“Twenty or thirty men array themselves in harlequin rig and barbaric paint, and put vessels of pitch on their heads; then they secretly go out into the surrounding mountains. These are to personify the devils. A herald goes up to the top of the assembly-house, and makes a speech to the multitude. At a signal agreed upon in the evening the masqueraders come in from the mountains, with the vessels of pitch flaming on their heads, and with all the frightful accessories of noise, motion, and costume which the savage mind can devise in representation of demons. The terrified women and children flee for life, the men huddle them inside a circle, and, on the principle of fighting the devil with fire, they swing <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page171">[pg 171]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg171" name="Pg171"/> blazing firebrands in the air, yell, whoop, and make frantic dashes at the marauding and bloodthirsty devils, so creating a terrific spectacle, and striking great fear into the hearts of the assembled hundreds of women, who are screaming and fainting and clinging to their valorous protectors. Finally the devils succeed in getting into the assembly-house, and the bravest of the men enter and hold a parley with them. As a conclusion of the whole farce, the men summon courage, the devils are expelled from the assembly-house, and with a prodigious row and racket of sham fighting are chased away into the mountains.”</span><a href="#note_423" id="noteref_423" name="noteref_423"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">423</span></span></a> In spring, as soon as the willow-leaves were full grown on the banks of the river, the Mandan Indians celebrated their great annual festival, one of the features of which was the expulsion of the devil. A man, painted black to represent the devil, entered the village from the prairie, chased and frightened the women, and acted the part of a buffalo bull in the buffalo dance, the object of which was to ensure a plentiful supply of buffaloes during the ensuing year. Finally he was chased from the village, the women pursuing him with hisses and gibes, beating him with sticks, and pelting him with dirt.<a href="#note_424" id="noteref_424" name="noteref_424"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">424</span></span></a> The Mayas of Yucatan divided the year into eighteen months of twenty days each, and they added five supplementary days at the end of the year in order to make a total of three hundred and sixty-five days. These five supplementary days were deemed unlucky. In the course of them the people banished the evils that might threaten them in the year on which they were about to enter. For that purpose they made a clay image of the demon of evil Uuayayab, that is <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">u-uayab-haab</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“He by whom the year is poisoned,”</span> confronted it with the deity who had supreme power over the coming year, and then carried it out of the village in the direction of that cardinal point to which, on the system of the Mayan calendar, the particular year was supposed to belong. Having thus rid themselves of the demon, they looked forward to a happy New Year.<a href="#note_425" id="noteref_425" name="noteref_425"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">425</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page172">[pg 172]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg172" name="Pg172"/>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Expulsion of a demon personified by a man among the aborigines of Queensland. Expulsion of demons embodied in effigies in India and Russia. Expulsion of demons embodied in animals or boys in Esthonia and Spain.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some of the native tribes of Central Queensland believe in a noxious being called Molonga, who prowls unseen and would kill men and violate women if certain ceremonies were not performed. These ceremonies last for five nights and consist of dances, in which only men, fantastically painted and adorned, take part. On the fifth night Molonga himself, personified by a man tricked out with red ochre and feathers and carrying a long feather-tipped spear, rushes forth from the darkness at the spectators and makes as if he would run them through. Great is the excitement, loud are the shrieks and shouts, but after another feigned attack the demon vanishes in the gloom.<a href="#note_426" id="noteref_426" name="noteref_426"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">426</span></span></a> On the last night of the year the palace of the Kings of Cambodia is purged of devils. Men painted as fiends are chased by elephants about the palace courts. When they have been expelled, a consecrated thread of cotton is stretched round the palace to keep them out.<a href="#note_427" id="noteref_427" name="noteref_427"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">427</span></span></a> In Munzerabad, a district of Mysore in Southern India, when cholera or smallpox has broken out in a parish, the inhabitants assemble and conjure the demon of the disease into a wooden image, which they carry, generally at midnight, into the next parish. The inhabitants of that parish in like manner pass the image on to their neighbours, and thus the demon is expelled from one village after another, until he comes to the bank of a river into which he is finally thrown.<a href="#note_428" id="noteref_428" name="noteref_428"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">428</span></span></a> Russian villagers seek to protect themselves against epidemics, whether of man or beast, by drawing a furrow with a plough right round the village. The plough is dragged by four widows and the ceremony is performed at night; all fires and lights must be extinguished while the plough is going the round. The people think that no unclean spirit can pass the furrow which has thus been traced. In the village of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page173">[pg 173]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg173" name="Pg173"/> Dubrowitschi a puppet is carried before the plough with the cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“Out of the village with the unclean spirit!”</span> and at the end of the ceremony it is torn in pieces and the fragments scattered about.<a href="#note_429" id="noteref_429" name="noteref_429"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">429</span></span></a> No doubt the demon of the disease is supposed to be in the puppet and to be destroyed with it. Sometimes in an Esthonian village a rumour will get about that the Evil One himself has been seen in the place. Instantly the whole village is in an uproar, and the entire population, armed with sticks, flails, and scythes, turns out to give him chase. They generally expel him in the shape of a wolf or a cat, occasionally they brag that they have beaten the devil to death.<a href="#note_430" id="noteref_430" name="noteref_430"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">430</span></span></a> At Carmona, in Andalusia, on one day of the year, boys are stripped naked and smeared with glue in which feathers are stuck. Thus disguised, they run from house to house, the people trying to avoid them and to bar their houses against them.<a href="#note_431" id="noteref_431" name="noteref_431"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">431</span></span></a> The ceremony is probably a relic of an annual expulsion of devils.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of the demon of plague among the Khasis of Assam. The Tug of War probably a contest with demons represented by human beings. The Tug of War at funerals in Chittagong and Burma.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some of the Khasis of Assam annually expel the demon of plague. The ceremony is called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Beh-dieng-khlam</span></span>, that is <span class="tei tei-q">“Driving away (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">beh</span></span>) the plague (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">khlam</span></span>) with sticks (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">dieng</span></span>)”</span>; it takes place in the Deep-water month (June). On the day fixed for the expulsion the men rise early and beat the roof with sticks, calling upon the demon of the plague to leave the house. Later in the day they go down to the stream where the goddess Aitan dwells. Then long poles or bamboos, newly cut, are laid across the stream and the people jump on them, trying to break them; when they succeed, they give a great shout. Next a very large pole or bamboo is similarly laid across the stream, and the people divide themselves into two parties, one on each side of the stream, and pull against each other at opposite ends of the pole. According to one account the party which succeeds in dragging the pole to their side of the stream is supposed to gain health and prosperity during the coming year. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page174">[pg 174]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg174" name="Pg174"/> According to another account, if the people on the east bank win in the contest or <span class="tei tei-q">“tug-of-war,”</span> good luck and prosperity are assured; but if the people on the west bank are victorious, then everything will go wrong. On this occasion the people disguise themselves as giants and wild beasts, and they parade images of serpents, elephants, tigers, peacocks, and so on. The men dance with enthusiasm, and the girls, dressed in their best, look on. Before the assembly breaks up, the men play a sort of game of hockey with wooden balls.<a href="#note_432" id="noteref_432" name="noteref_432"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">432</span></span></a> In this ceremonial contest or <span class="tei tei-q">“tug of war”</span> between two parties of the people, we may conjecture that the one party represents the expelled demons of the plague; and if that is so, we may perhaps assume that in the struggle the representatives of the demons generally allow themselves to be overcome by their adversaries, in order that the village may be free from pestilence in the coming year. Similarly in autumn the Central Esquimaux divide themselves into two parties, representing summer and winter respectively, which pull at opposite ends of a rope; and they draw omens of the weather to be expected in the coming winter according as the party of summer or of winter prevails in the struggle.<a href="#note_433" id="noteref_433" name="noteref_433"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">433</span></span></a> That in such contests, resembling our English game of <span class="tei tei-q">“French and English”</span> or the <span class="tei tei-q">“Tug of War,”</span> the one side may represent demons is proved by a custom observed by the Chukmas, a tribe of the Chittagong Hill Tracts in South-Eastern India. <span class="tei tei-q">“On the death of a Dewan or of a priest a curious sport is customary at the funeral. The corpse is conveyed to the place of cremation on a car; to this car ropes are attached, and the persons attending the ceremony are divided into two equal bodies and set to work to pull in opposite directions. One side represents the good spirits; the other, the powers of evil. The contest is so arranged that the former are victorious. Sometimes, however, the young men representing the demons are inclined to pull too vigorously, but a stick generally quells this unseemly <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page175">[pg 175]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg175" name="Pg175"/> ardour in the cause of evil.”</span><a href="#note_434" id="noteref_434" name="noteref_434"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">434</span></span></a> The contest is like that between the angels and devils depicted in the frescoes of the Campo Santo at Pisa. In Burma a similar struggle takes place at the funeral of a Buddhist monk who passed for a saint in the popular estimation: ropes are attached to opposite ends of the car on which the coffin is placed, all the able-bodied men of the neighbourhood hold on to one or other of the two ends and pull as if for dear life against each other; even the women and girls sometimes join in the tug of war, and policemen have been seen, in a state of frantic excitement, waving their batons to encourage the combatants and dragging back shirkers by main force into the fighting line. The struggle is sometimes prolonged for hours or even days.<a href="#note_435" id="noteref_435" name="noteref_435"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">435</span></span></a> With the example of the Chukmas before us, we may conjecture that the original motive of this internecine strife was a persuasion that the eternal happiness or misery of the departed saint depended on the issue of this contest between the powers of good and evil for the possession of his mortal remains.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Tug of War as a rain-making ceremony in Burma and else where.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">But in Burma the tug of war has been employed for more secular purposes than the salvation or perdition of souls. <span class="tei tei-q">“The inhabitants,”</span> we are told, <span class="tei tei-q">“still have a custom of pulling a rope to produce rain. A rain party and a drought party tug against each other, the rain party being allowed the victory, which in the popular notion is generally followed by rain.”</span><a href="#note_436" id="noteref_436" name="noteref_436"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">436</span></span></a> The mode in which this salutary result follows from tugging at a rope is explained by the Burmese doctrine of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">nats</span></span> or spirits who cause rain. But it is only when these spirits sport in the air that rain falls; when they shut themselves up in their houses there is drought. Now in some Burmese writings <span class="tei tei-q">“it is said, that when the sun is in the path of the goat, these <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat</span></span> do not chuse to leave their houses on account of the great heat, whence there is then no rain. For this reason, the inhabitants of the Burma <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page176">[pg 176]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg176" name="Pg176"/> empire, in times of drought, are wont to assemble in great numbers, with drums and a long cable. Dividing themselves into two parties, with a vast shouting and noise, they drag the cable contrary ways, the one party endeavouring to get the better of the other: and they think, by this means, to invite the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat</span></span> to come out from their houses, and to sport in the air. The thunder and lightning, which frequently precede rain, are the clashing and shining of the arms of these <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat</span></span>, who sometimes sport in mock battles.”</span><a href="#note_437" id="noteref_437" name="noteref_437"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">437</span></span></a> Apparently, therefore, in the tug of war, practised as a rain-charm, the one party represent the spirits who have to be dragged reluctantly from their houses in order to make rain in the sky. Similarly in the Timor-laut Islands, when the people want a rainy wind from the west, the population of the village, men, women, and children divide into two parties and pull against each other at the end of a long bamboo. But the party at the eastern end must pull the harder, in order to draw the desired wind out of the west.<a href="#note_438" id="noteref_438" name="noteref_438"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">438</span></span></a> We can now perhaps understand why among the Khasis the victory of the eastern side in the tug of war is thought to prognosticate good luck and prosperity, and why the victory of the western side is believed to portend the contrary; the distinction is at once intelligible when we remember that in the country of the Khasis the rainy wind is the monsoon which blows from the south-west, whereas the wind which blows from the south-east is hot and dry.<a href="#note_439" id="noteref_439" name="noteref_439"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">439</span></span></a> Thus a victory of the eastern party in the tug of war means that they have drawn rain and consequently fertility into the country from the west; whereas a victory of the western party signifies that they have dragged drought and consequently dearth into the country from the east.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Tug of War between the sexes. The Tug of War in Kamtchatka and New Guinea.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">However, a somewhat different turn is given to the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page177">[pg 177]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg177" name="Pg177"/> ceremony of rope-pulling in the East Indies by another writer, who informs us, that while the contest only takes place in some of these islands when rain is wanted, it is closely connected with those licentious rites performed for the fertilization of the ground which have been described in another part of this work.<a href="#note_440" id="noteref_440" name="noteref_440"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">440</span></span></a> According to this account the men and women appear to take opposite sides in the tug of war, and in pulling against each other they imitate by their movements the union of the sexes.<a href="#note_441" id="noteref_441" name="noteref_441"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">441</span></span></a> If that is so, it would seem that the rite is a magical ceremony designed to promote the fertility of the ground by means of homoeopathic or imitative magic. The same may perhaps be the intention of the tug of war as it is practised for the benefit of the crops by some of the Naga tribes of Assam, and this is the more likely because in the case of these tribes we are definitely told that the sexes take opposite sides, the women and girls tugging against the men and boys. This is done by the Tangkhuls of Assam a month after the rice has been sown; the ceremony is performed <span class="tei tei-q">“in order to take the omens for the future of the crops,”</span> and it <span class="tei tei-q">“is followed by considerable license.”</span> The tug of war between the sexes with its attendant license is repeated before the first-fruits are cut by the sacred headman.<a href="#note_442" id="noteref_442" name="noteref_442"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">442</span></span></a> In Corea about the fifteenth day of the first month villages engage in the same kind of contest with each other, and it is thought that the village which wins will have a good harvest. The rope which they pull is made of straw, two feet in diameter, with its ends divided into branches. The men lay hold of the main stem, while the women grasp the branches, and they often tug harder than the men, for they load their skirts with stones, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page178">[pg 178]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg178" name="Pg178"/> which adds weight to the force of their muscles.<a href="#note_443" id="noteref_443" name="noteref_443"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">443</span></span></a> In Kamtchatka, when the fishing season is over, the people used to divide into two parties, one of which tried to pull a birch-tree by a strap through the smoke-hole into their subterranean winter dwelling, while the other party outside, pulling at the end of the tree, endeavoured to hinder them. If the party in the house succeeded, they raised shouts of joy and set up a grass effigy of a wolf, which they preserved carefully throughout the year, believing that it espoused their young women and prevented them from giving birth to twins. For they deem the birth of twins a dreadful misfortune and a horrible sin; they put it down to the wolf in the forest, and all who chance to be in the house at the time shew a clean pair of heels, leaving the mother and her infants to shift for themselves. Should the twins be both girls, the calamity is even greater.<a href="#note_444" id="noteref_444" name="noteref_444"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">444</span></span></a> In the village of Doreh, in Dutch New Guinea, when some of the inhabitants have gone on a long journey, the people who stay at home engage in a Tug of War among themselves to determine whether the journey will be prosperous or not. One side represents the voyagers and the other side those who are left behind. They pull at opposite ends of a long bamboo, and if the bamboo breaks or the side which represents the people at home is obliged to let go, the omen is favourable.<a href="#note_445" id="noteref_445" name="noteref_445"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">445</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Tug of War in Morocco to procure rain or sunshine.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Morocco, also, the Tug of War is resorted to as a means of influencing the weather, sometimes in order to procure rain and sometimes to procure sunshine; and here men and women appear usually to take opposite sides in the contest. For example, among the Igliwa, a Berber people of the Great Atlas, when rain is wanted, they take a rope and the men pull at one end and women at the other. While they are tugging away, a man suddenly cuts the rope and the women fall down. The same device for procuring rain in time of drought is practised by the Ait Warain, another Berber tribe of Morocco; but among them in the heat of the contest the women as well as the men will sometimes <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page179">[pg 179]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg179" name="Pg179"/> let go the rope and allow the opposite party to fall on their backs. However, the Tsûl, another Berber tribe of Morocco, employ the Tug of War for the opposite purpose of ensuring a supply of sunshine and heat in autumn, when they wish to dry their figs and grapes; the contest takes place at night by the light of the moon.<a href="#note_446" id="noteref_446" name="noteref_446"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">446</span></span></a> The apparent contradiction of employing the same procedure for opposite purposes vanishes if we suppose that, as the Assamese custom seems to indicate, the intention is to draw either a rainy or a dry wind out of the quarters from which the breezes that bring rain or sunshine usually blow, and which will usually be on opposite sides of the sky. Hence in order fully to understand the Tug of War, when it is practised for the purpose of influencing the weather, we should know, first, the directions from which the rainy and the dry winds respectively come in the country under consideration, and second, the direction in which the rope is stretched between the contending parties. If, for example, as happens in Assam, the rainy wind blows from the west, and a victory of the eastern party in the Tug of War is an omen of prosperity, we may conclude with a fair degree of probability that the intention of the contest is to draw the rain from the quarter of the sky in which it is lingering. But these niceties of observation have usually escaped the attention of those who have described the Tug of War.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Games of ball in Morocco to procure rain or sunshine.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In various parts of Morocco games of ball are played for the sake now of procuring rain and now of procuring dry weather; the ball is sometimes propelled with sticks and sometimes with the feet of the competitors. An Arab questioned as to why a game of ball should bring on rain explained that the ball is dark like a rain-cloud.<a href="#note_447" id="noteref_447" name="noteref_447"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">447</span></span></a> Perhaps the answer furnishes the clue to the meaning of the rite. If in such games played to influence the weather the ball represents a rain-cloud, the success or failure of the charm <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page180">[pg 180]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg180" name="Pg180"/> will depend on which side contrives to get the ball home in the enemy's quarters. For example, if rain is desired and the rainy wind blows in Morocco, as may perhaps be assumed, from the west, then should the western side succeed in driving the ball through the eastern goal, there will be rain; but if the eastern party wins, then the rain is driven away and the drought will continue. Thus a game of ball would in theory and practice answer exactly to the Tug of War practised for the same purposes.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Tug of War in Morocco to ensure prosperity.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Morocco, however, the Tug of War is apparently used also for the purpose of ensuring prosperity in general without any special reference to the weather. Dr. Westermarck was informed by an old Arab from the Hiaina that the Tug of War <span class="tei tei-q">“is no longer practised at the Great Feast, as it was in his childhood, but that it is performed in the autumn when the threshing is going on and the fruits are ripe. Then men and women have a tug of war by moonlight so that the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">bäs</span></span>, or evil, shall go away, that the year shall be good, and that the people shall live in peace. Some man secretly cuts two of the three cords of which the rope is made, with the result that both parties tumble down.”</span><a href="#note_448" id="noteref_448" name="noteref_448"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">448</span></span></a> In this contest one party perhaps represents the powers of good and the other the powers of evil in general. But why in these Moroccan cases of the Tug of War the rope should be so often cut and one or both sides laid on their backs, is not manifest. Perhaps the simple device of suddenly slacking the rope in order to make the opposite side lose their footing, and so to haul the rope away from them before they can recover themselves, may have led to the more trenchant measure of cutting it with a knife for the same purpose.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Spiritual significance of the Tug of War. The Tug of War in French Guiana, in North-Western India.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">These examples make it probable that wherever the Tug of War is played only at certain definite seasons or on certain particular occasions, it was originally performed, not as a mere pastime, but as a magical ceremony designed to work some good for the community. Further, we may surmise that in many cases the two contending parties represent respectively the powers of good and evil struggling against each other for the mastery, and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page181">[pg 181]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg181" name="Pg181"/> as the community has always an interest in the prevalence of the powers of good, it may well happen that the powers of evil do not always get fair play in these conflicts; though no doubt when it comes to be <span class="tei tei-q">“pull devil, pull baker,”</span> the devil is apt, in the spirit of a true sportsman, to tug with as hearty good will as his far more deserving adversary the baker. To take cases in which the game is played without any alleged practical motive, the Roocooyen Indians of French Guiana engage in the Tug of War as a sort of interlude during the ceremonial tortures of the youth.<a href="#note_449" id="noteref_449" name="noteref_449"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">449</span></span></a> Among the Cingalese the game <span class="tei tei-q">“is connected with the superstitious worship of the goddess Patiné; and is more intended for a propitiation to that deity, than considered as an indulgence, or pursued as an exercise. Two opposite parties procure two sticks of the strongest and toughest wood, and so crooked as to hook into one another without slipping; they then attach strong cords or cable-rattans of sufficient length to allow of every one laying hold of them. The contending parties then pull until one of the sticks gives way.”</span> The victorious piece of wood is gaily decorated, placed in a palanquin, and borne through the village amid noisy rejoicings, often accompanied with coarse and obscene expressions.<a href="#note_450" id="noteref_450" name="noteref_450"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">450</span></span></a> The use of foul language on this occasion suggests that the ceremony is here, as elsewhere, observed for the purpose of ensuring fertility. In the North-Western provinces of India the game is played on the fourteenth day of the light half of the month Kuar. The rope (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">barra</span></span>) is made of the grass called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">makra</span></span>, and is thicker than a man's arm. The various quarters of a village pull against each other, and the one which is victorious keeps possession of the rope during the ensuing year. It is chiefly in the east of these provinces that the game is played; in the west it is unknown.<a href="#note_451" id="noteref_451" name="noteref_451"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">451</span></span></a> Sometimes the contest is between the inhabitants of neighbouring villages, and the rope is stretched across the boundary; <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page182">[pg 182]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg182" name="Pg182"/> plenty is supposed to attend the victorious side.<a href="#note_452" id="noteref_452" name="noteref_452"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">452</span></span></a> At the Great Feast, a yearly sacrificial festival of the Mohammedan world, some tribes in Morocco practise a Tug of War. Thus among the Ait Sadden it is observed on the first day of the festival before the sacrifice; among the Ait Yusi it is performed either before the religious service or in the afternoon of the same day, and also in the morning of the Little Feast. Both sexes generally take part in the contest, the men tugging at one end of the rope and the women at the other, and sometimes the weaker party applies for help to persons of the same sex in a neighbouring village. When they are all hard at it, the men may suddenly let go the rope and so send the women sprawling on their backs.<a href="#note_453" id="noteref_453" name="noteref_453"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">453</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Tug of War in Shropshire and Radnorshire. Contests for a ball (</span>
							<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr">
								<span style="font-size: 80%; font-style: italic">soule</span>
							</span>
							<span style="font-size: 80%">) in Normandy.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At Ludlow in Shropshire a grand Tug of War used to take place on Shrove Tuesday between the inhabitants of Broad Street Ward on the one side and of Corve Street Ward on the other. The rope was three inches thick and thirty-six yards long, with a red knob at one end and a blue knob at the other. The rope was paid out by the Mayor in person from a window in the Market Hall at four o'clock in the afternoon. The shops then put up their shutters, and the population engaged in the struggle with enthusiasm, gentle and simple, lawyers and parsons bearing a hand on one side or the other, till their clothes were torn to tatters on their backs. The injured were carried into the neighbouring houses, where their hurts were attended to. If the party of the Red Knob won, they carried the rope in triumph to the River Leme and dipped it in the water. Finally, the rope was sold, the money which it brought in was devoted to the purchase of beer, and drinking, squabbling, and fighting ended the happy day. This ancient and highly popular pastime was suppressed in 1851 on the frivolous pretext that it gave rise to disorderly scenes and dangerous accidents.<a href="#note_454" id="noteref_454" name="noteref_454"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">454</span></span></a> A similar custom has long been observed on Shrove Tuesday at Presteign in Radnorshire. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page183">[pg 183]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg183" name="Pg183"/> The rope is pulled by two parties representing the upper and the lower portions of the town, who strive to drag it either to a point in the west wall or to another point in Broad Street, where the River Lugg is reached.<a href="#note_455" id="noteref_455" name="noteref_455"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">455</span></span></a> In the Bocage of Normandy most desperate struggles used to take place between neighbouring parishes on Shrove Tuesday for the possession of a large leathern ball stuffed with bran and called a <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">soule</span></span>. The ball was launched on the village green and contended for by representatives of different parishes, who sometimes numbered seven or eight hundred, while five or six thousand people might assemble to witness the combat; for indeed it was a fight rather than a game. The conflict was maintained with the utmost fury; old scores were paid off between personal enemies; there were always many wounded, and sometimes there were deaths. The aim of each side was to drive the ball over a stream and to lodge it in a house of their own parish. It was thought that the parish which was victorious in the struggle would have a better crop of apples that year than its neighbours. At Lande-Patry the ball was provided by the bride who had been last married, and she had the honour of throwing it into the arena. The scene of the fiercest battles was St. Pierre d'Entremont, on the highroad between Condé and Tinchebray. After several unsuccessful attempts the custom was suppressed at that village in 1852 with the help of four or five brigades of police. It is now everywhere extinct.<a href="#note_456" id="noteref_456" name="noteref_456"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">456</span></span></a> The belief that the parish which succeeded in carrying the ball home would have a better crop of apples that year raises a presumption that these conflicts were originally practised as magical rites to ensure fertility. The local custom of Lande-Patry, which required that the ball should be provided and thrown by the last bride,<a href="#note_457" id="noteref_457" name="noteref_457"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">457</span></span></a> points in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page184">[pg 184]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg184" name="Pg184"/> same direction. It is possible that the popular English, or rather Scotch, game of football had a similar origin: the winning side may have imagined that they secured good crops, good weather, or other substantial advantages to their village or ward.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual sham fights may represent contests with demons.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In like manner, wherever a sham or a real conflict takes place between two parties annually, above all at the New Year, we may suspect that the old intention was to ensure prosperity in some form for the people throughout the following year, whether by obtaining possession of a material object in which the luck of the year was supposed to be embodied, or by defeating and driving away a band of men who personated the powers of evil. For example, among the Tenggerese of eastern Java the New Year festival regularly includes a sham fight fought between two bands of men, who are armed with spears and swords and advance against each other again and again at a dancing step, thrusting at their adversaries with their spears, but always taking care to miss their aim.<a href="#note_458" id="noteref_458" name="noteref_458"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">458</span></span></a> Again, in Ferghana, a province of Turkestan, it is or used to be customary on the first day of the year for the king and chiefs to divide into two parties, each of which chose a champion. Then the two champions, clad in armour, engaged in a combat with each other, while the crowd joined in with bricks and stones. When one of them was slain the scrimmage stopped, and omens were drawn as to whether the year on which they had entered would be prosperous or the reverse.<a href="#note_459" id="noteref_459" name="noteref_459"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">459</span></span></a> In these combats it seems probable that one side represents the demons or other powers of evil whom the people hope to vanquish and expel at the beginning of the New Year.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Oftener, however, the expelled demons are not represented at all, but are understood to be present invisibly in the material and visible vehicle which conveys them away. Here, again, it will be convenient to distinguish between occasional and periodical expulsions. We begin with the former.</p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page185">[pg 185]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg185" name="Pg185"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc29" name="toc29"/>
					<a id="pdf30" name="pdf30"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. The Occasional Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.</span>
					</h2>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Demons of sickness expelled in a small ship in Ceram.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The vehicle which conveys away the demons may be of various kinds. A common one is a little ship or boat. Thus, in the southern district of the island of Ceram, when a whole village suffers from sickness, a small ship is made and filled with rice, tobacco, eggs, and so forth, which have been contributed by all the people. A little sail is hoisted on the ship. When all is ready, a man calls out in a very loud voice, <span class="tei tei-q">“O all ye sicknesses, ye smallpoxes, agues, measles, etc., who have visited us so long and wasted us so sorely, but who now cease to plague us, we have made ready this ship for you and we have furnished you with provender sufficient for the voyage. Ye shall have no lack of food nor of betel-leaves nor of areca nuts nor of tobacco. Depart, and sail away from us directly; never come near us again; but go to a land which is far from here. Let all the tides and winds waft you speedily thither, and so convey you thither that for the time to come we may live sound and well, and that we may never see the sun rise on you again.”</span> Then ten or twelve men carry the vessel to the shore, and let it drift away with the land-breeze, feeling convinced that they are free from sickness for ever, or at least till the next time. If sickness attacks them again, they are sure it is not the same sickness, but a different one, which in due time they dismiss in the same manner. When the demon-laden bark is lost to sight, the bearers return to the village, whereupon a man cries out, <span class="tei tei-q">“The sicknesses are now gone, vanished, expelled, and sailed away.”</span> At this all the people come running out of their houses, passing the word from one to the other with great joy, beating on gongs and on tinkling instruments.<a href="#note_460" id="noteref_460" name="noteref_460"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">460</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Demons of sickness expelled in a small ship in Timor-laut, in a ship in Buru, removed from the persons of the sufferers.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Similar ceremonies are commonly resorted to in other East Indian islands. Thus in Timor-laut, to mislead the demons who are causing sickness, a small proa, containing the image of a man and provisioned for a long voyage, is allowed to drift away with wind and tide. As it is being <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page186">[pg 186]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg186" name="Pg186"/> launched, the people cry, <span class="tei tei-q">“O sickness, go from here; turn back; what do you here in this poor land?”</span> Three days after this ceremony a pig is killed, and part of the flesh is offered to Dudilaa, who lives in the sun. One of the oldest men says, <span class="tei tei-q">“Old sir, I beseech you make well the grandchildren, children, women, and men, that we may be able to eat pork and rice and to drink palm-wine. I will keep my promise. Eat your share, and make all the people in the village well.”</span> If the proa is stranded at any inhabited spot, the sickness will break out there. Hence a stranded proa excites much alarm amongst the coast population, and they immediately burn it, because demons fly from fire.<a href="#note_461" id="noteref_461" name="noteref_461"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">461</span></span></a> In the island of Buru the proa which carries away the demons of disease is about twenty feet long, rigged out with sails, oars, anchor, and so on, and well stocked with provisions. For a day and a night the people beat gongs and drums, and rush about to frighten the demons. Next morning ten stalwart young men strike the people with branches, which have been previously dipped in an earthen pot of water. As soon as they have done so, they run down to the beach, put the branches on board the proa, launch another boat in great haste, and tow the disease-burdened bark far out to sea. There they cast it off, and one of them calls out, <span class="tei tei-q">“Grandfather Smallpox, go away—go willingly away—go visit another land; we have made you food ready for the voyage, we have now nothing more to give.”</span> When they have landed, all the people bathe together in the sea.<a href="#note_462" id="noteref_462" name="noteref_462"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">462</span></span></a> In this ceremony the reason for striking the people with the branches is clearly to rid them of the disease-demons, which are then supposed to be transferred to the branches. Hence the haste with which the branches are deposited in the proa and towed away to sea. So in the inland districts of Ceram, when smallpox or other sickness is raging, the priest strikes all the houses with consecrated branches, which are then thrown into the river, to be carried down to the sea;<a href="#note_463" id="noteref_463" name="noteref_463"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">463</span></span></a> exactly as amongst the Wotyaks of Russia the sticks which have been used for expelling the devils from the village are thrown <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page187">[pg 187]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg187" name="Pg187"/> into the river, that the current may sweep the baleful burden away.<a href="#note_464" id="noteref_464" name="noteref_464"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">464</span></span></a> In Amboyna, for a similar purpose, the whole body of the patient is rubbed with a live white cock, which is then placed on a little proa and committed to the waves;<a href="#note_465" id="noteref_465" name="noteref_465"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">465</span></span></a> and in the Babar archipelago the bark which is to carry away to sea the sickness of a whole village contains a bowl of ashes taken from every kitchen in the village, and another bowl into which all the sick people have spat.<a href="#note_466" id="noteref_466" name="noteref_466"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">466</span></span></a> The plan of putting puppets in the boat to represent sick persons, in order to lure the demons after them, is not uncommon.<a href="#note_467" id="noteref_467" name="noteref_467"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">467</span></span></a> For example, most of the pagan tribes on the coast of Borneo seek to drive away epidemic disease as follows. They carve one or more rough human images from the pith of the sago palm and place them on a small raft or boat or full-rigged Malay ship together with rice and other food. The boat is decked with blossoms of the areca palm and with ribbons made from its leaves, and thus adorned the little craft is allowed to float out to sea with the ebb-tide, bearing, as the people fondly think or hope, the sickness away with it.<a href="#note_468" id="noteref_468" name="noteref_468"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">468</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Demons of disease expelled in a ship in Selangor.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Selangor, one of the native states in the Malay Peninsula, the ship employed in the export of disease is, or used to be, a model of a special kind of Malay craft called a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">lanchang</span></span>. This was a two-masted vessel with galleries fore and aft, armed with cannon, and used by Malay rajahs on the coast of Sumatra. So gallant a ship would be highly acceptable to the spirits, and to make it still more beautiful in their eyes it was not uncommonly stained yellow with turmeric or saffron, for among the Malays yellow is the royal colour. Some years ago a very fine model of a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">lanchang</span></span>, with its cargo of sickness, was towed down the river to sea by the Government steam launch. A common spell uttered at the launching of one of these ships runs as follows:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Ho, elders of the upper reaches,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Elders of the lower reaches,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Elders of the dry land</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">,</span>
							</div>
							<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page188">[pg 188]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg188" name="Pg188"/>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Elders of the river-flats,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Assemble ye, O people, lords of hill and hill-foot,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Lords of cavern and hill-locked basin,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Lords of the deep primeval forest,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Lords of the river-bends,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Come on board this</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">lanchang,</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">assembling in your multitudes.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">So may ye depart with the ebbing stream,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Depart on the passing breeze,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Depart in the yawning earth,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Depart in the red-dyed earth.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Go ye to the ocean which has no wave,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And the plain where no green herb grows,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And never return hither.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">But if ye return hither,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Ye shall be consumed by the curse.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">At sea ye shall get no drink,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Ashore ye shall get no food,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">But gape in vain about the world</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">.</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_469" id="noteref_469" name="noteref_469">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">469</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Demons of sickness expelled in small ships in New Guinea, the Philippines, Tikopia, and the Nicobar Islands.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The practice of sending away diseases in boats is known outside the limits of the Malay region. Thus when smallpox raged among the Yabim of German New Guinea, they used to make a little model of a canoe with mast, sail, and rudder. Then they said to the small vessel, on which the spirit of smallpox was supposed to have taken his passage, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bear him away to another village. When the people come forth to draw you ashore, give them <span class="tei tei-q">‘the thing’</span> and do to them what you have done to us.”</span> Lest the spirit should be hungry on the voyage, they put some taro on board, and to make sure of getting rid of the disease, they wiped their hands on the tiny canoe, after which they let it drift away. It often happened that the wind or <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page189">[pg 189]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg189" name="Pg189"/> tide drove the vessel back to the place from which it started. Then there would be a deafening rub-a-dub of drums and blowing of shell-trumpets; and the little ship, or rather its invisible passenger, would be again apostrophized, <span class="tei tei-q">“Do go away, you have already raged among us so that the air is poisoned with the stench of corpses.”</span> If this time it sailed away, they would stand on the shore and watch it with glad hearts disappearing; then they would climb the trees to get a last glimpse of it till it vanished in the distance. After that they came down joyfully and said to each other, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have had enough of it. The sickness has happily gone away.”</span><a href="#note_470" id="noteref_470" name="noteref_470"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">470</span></span></a> When the Tagbanuas and other tribes of the Philippines suffered from epidemics, they used to make little models of ships, supply them with rice and fresh drinking water, and launch them on the sea, in order that the evil spirits might sail away in them.<a href="#note_471" id="noteref_471" name="noteref_471"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">471</span></span></a> When the people of Tikopia, a small island in the Pacific, to the north of the New Hebrides, were attacked by an epidemic cough, they made a little canoe and adorned it with flowers. Four sons of the principal chiefs carried it on their shoulders all round the island, accompanied by the whole population, some of whom beat the bushes, while others uttered loud cries. On returning to the spot from which they had set out, they launched the canoe on the sea.<a href="#note_472" id="noteref_472" name="noteref_472"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">472</span></span></a> In the Nicobar Islands, in the Bay of Bengal, when there is much sickness in a village or no fish are caught, the blame is laid upon the spirits. They must be propitiated with offerings. All relations and friends are invited, a huge pig is roasted, and the best of it is eaten, but some parts are offered to the shades. The heap of offerings remains in front of the house till it is carried away by the rising tide. Then the priests, their faces reddened with paint and swine's blood, pretend to catch the demon of disease, and after a hand-to-hand tussle, force him into a model boat, made of leaves and decked with garlands, which is then towed so far to sea that neither wind nor tide is <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page190">[pg 190]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg190" name="Pg190"/> likely to drive it back to the shore.<a href="#note_473" id="noteref_473" name="noteref_473"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">473</span></span></a> In Annam, when the population of a village has been decimated by cholera, they make a raft and lade it with offerings of money and food, such as a sucking pig, bananas, and oranges. Sticks of incense also smoke on the floating altar; and when all is ready and earnest prayers have been uttered, the raft is abandoned to the current of the river. The people hope that the demon of cholera, allured and gratified by these offerings, will float away on the raft and trouble them no more.<a href="#note_474" id="noteref_474" name="noteref_474"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">474</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Demons of sickness expelled in the form of animals in India.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Often the vehicle which carries away the collected demons or ills of a whole community is an animal or scapegoat. In the Central Provinces of India, when cholera breaks out in a village, every one retires after sunset to his house. The priests then parade the streets, taking from the roof of each house a straw, which is burnt with an offering of rice, ghee, and turmeric, at some shrine to the east of the village. Chickens daubed with vermilion are driven away in the direction of the smoke, and are believed to carry the disease with them. If they fail, goats are tried, and last of all pigs.<a href="#note_475" id="noteref_475" name="noteref_475"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">475</span></span></a> When cholera rages among the Bhars, Malians, and Kurmis of India, they take a goat or a buffalo—in either case the animal must be a female, and as black as possible—then having tied some grain, cloves, and red lead in a yellow cloth on its back they turn it out of the village. The animal is conducted beyond the boundary and not allowed to return.<a href="#note_476" id="noteref_476" name="noteref_476"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">476</span></span></a> Sometimes the buffalo is marked with a red pigment and driven to the next village, where he carries the plague with him.<a href="#note_477" id="noteref_477" name="noteref_477"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">477</span></span></a> The people of the city and cantonments of Sagar being <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page191">[pg 191]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg191" name="Pg191"/> afflicted with a violent influenza, General Sir William Sleeman received a request from the old Queen Dowager of Sagar <span class="tei tei-q">“to allow of a noisy religious procession for the purpose of imploring deliverance from this great calamity. Men, women, and children in this procession were to do their utmost to add to the noise by <span class="tei tei-q">‘raising their voices in psalmody,’</span> beating upon their brass pots and pans with all their might, and discharging firearms where they could get them; and before the noisy crowd was to be driven a buffalo, which had been purchased by general subscription, in order that every family might participate in the merit. They were to follow it out for eight miles, where it was to be turned loose for any man who would take it. If the animal returned, the disease, it was said, must return with it, and the ceremony be performed over again.... It was, however, subsequently determined that the animal should be a goat, and he was driven before the crowd accordingly. I have on several occasions been requested to allow of such noisy <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pūjās</span></span> in cases of epidemics.”</span><a href="#note_478" id="noteref_478" name="noteref_478"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">478</span></span></a> Once, when influenza was raging in Pithoria, a village to the north-west of Sagar, a man had a small carriage made, after a plan of his own, for a pair of scapegoats, which were harnessed to it and driven to a wood at some distance, where they were let loose. From that hour the disease entirely ceased in the town. The goats never returned; had they done so, it was affirmed that the disease must have come back with them.<a href="#note_479" id="noteref_479" name="noteref_479"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">479</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Goats and cocks employed as scapegoats in various parts of India.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The use of a scapegoat is not uncommon in the hills of the Eastern Ghats. In 1886, during a severe outbreak of smallpox, the people of Jepur did reverence to a goat, marched it to the Ghats, and let it loose on the plains.<a href="#note_480" id="noteref_480" name="noteref_480"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">480</span></span></a> In Southern Konkan, on the appearance of cholera, the villagers went in procession from the temple to the extreme boundaries of the village, carrying a basket of cooked rice covered with red powder, a wooden doll representing the pestilence, and a cock. The head of the cock was cut off at the village <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page192">[pg 192]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg192" name="Pg192"/> boundary, and the body was thrown away. When cholera had thus been transferred from one village to another, the second village observed the same ceremony and passed on the scourge to its neighbours, and so on through a number of villages.<a href="#note_481" id="noteref_481" name="noteref_481"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">481</span></span></a> Among the Korwas of Mirzapur, when cholera has broken out, the priest offers a black cock or, if the disease is very malignant, a black goat, at the shrine of the local deity, and then drives the animal away in the direction of some other village. But it has not gone far before he overtakes it, kills it, and eats it; which he may do with perfect safety in virtue of his sacred office. Again, when cholera is raging among the Pataris, an aboriginal Dravidian race of South Mirzapur, the wizard and the village elders feed a black cock with grain and drive it beyond the boundaries, ordering the fowl to take the disease away with it. A little oil, red lead, and a spangle worn by a woman on her forehead are usually fastened to the bird's head before it is let loose. The cost of purchasing the cock is defrayed by public subscription. When such a bird of ill-omen appears in a village, the priest takes it to the shrine of the local deity and sacrifices it there; but sometimes he merely bows before it at the shrine and passes it on to some other village. If a murrain attacks their cattle, the Kharwars of Northern India take a black cock and put red lead on its head, antimony on its eyes, a spangle on its forehead, and a pewter bangle on its leg; thus arrayed they let it loose, calling out to the disease, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mount on the fowl and go elsewhere into the ravines and thickets; destroy the sin.”</span> Perhaps, as has been suggested, this tricking out of the bird with women's ornaments may be a relic of some grosser form of expiation in which a human being was sacrificed or banished.<a href="#note_482" id="noteref_482" name="noteref_482"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">482</span></span></a> Charms of this sort in India no doubt date from a remote antiquity. An ancient Indian book of magic, known as the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kausika Sutra</span></span>, describes a ceremony of letting loose against a hostile army a white-footed ewe in which the power of disease was believed to be <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page193">[pg 193]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg193" name="Pg193"/> incarnate.<a href="#note_483" id="noteref_483" name="noteref_483"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">483</span></span></a> In the same treatise we read of a mode of getting rid of ill-luck by fastening a hook to the left leg of a crow, attaching a sacrificial cake to the hook, and then letting the bird fly away in a south-westerly direction, while the priest or magician recites as usual the appropriate formula.<a href="#note_484" id="noteref_484" name="noteref_484"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">484</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Cows, toads, and llamas as scapegoats in Africa and America.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Amongst the Dinkas, a pastoral people of the White Nile, each family possesses a sacred cow. When the country is threatened with war, famine, or any other public calamity, the chiefs of the village require a particular family to surrender their sacred cow to serve as a scapegoat. The animal is driven by the women to the brink of the river and across it to the other bank, there to wander in the wilderness and fall a prey to ravening beasts. Then the women return in silence and without looking behind them; were they to cast a backward glance, they imagine that the ceremony would have no effect.<a href="#note_485" id="noteref_485" name="noteref_485"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">485</span></span></a> When influenza broke out in a virulent form among the negroes of Togoland during the winter of 1892, the natives set the trouble down to the machinations of evil spirits, who must be expelled the country. The principal instrument of expulsion was a fat toad, which was dragged through the streets of every town or village, followed by an elder who sprinkled holy water to right and left. All the evil was thus concentrated in the toad, which was finally thrown away into the forest. Thus the natives expected to rid the village of the influenza.<a href="#note_486" id="noteref_486" name="noteref_486"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">486</span></span></a> In 1857, when the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru were suffering from a plague, they loaded a black llama with the clothes of the plague-stricken people, sprinkled brandy on the clothes, and then turned the animal loose on the mountains, hoping that it would carry the pest away with it.<a href="#note_487" id="noteref_487" name="noteref_487"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">487</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Goddess of disease expelled in a toy chariot.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In some parts of India a principal means of expelling <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page194">[pg 194]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg194" name="Pg194"/> an epidemic is a little toy chariot called a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ratha</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">rath</span></span>, in which the goddess of the disease is supposed to be carted away. It is carried or drawn in procession to the next village, the inhabitants of which pass it on in like manner, with great alacrity, to their neighbours. Thus the goddess and the plague are transferred from village to village, until at last they come to one which is so far away from its next neighbour that the people do not care to undertake the long weary journey. In that case they content themselves with conveying the chariot to a place so shut in by hills that the disease cannot possibly escape, and there they leave it to die. Or if the village is near the sea, they drown the sickness by throwing the chariot into the water. However, in Central India the real home of the goddess of cholera is at Unkareshwar; and accordingly the chariot in which she is politely escorted out of a village is finally deposited at or near that place. It is usual and proper for the people of a village to give a friendly notice to their neighbours that they are going to cart the cholera, smallpox, or whatever it may be, to their village, so that the inhabitants may be ready to receive the goddess with due honour and to escort her on her progress. But some unneighbourly folk, without giving notice, go by night and stealthily deposit the chariot on the outskirts of the next village. If the inhabitants are not on the watch, and suffer the fatal little vehicle to remain there, the disease will naturally cleave to them. Sometimes, perhaps generally, the procession with the chariot is accompanied by a goat, a cock, and a pot of native beer or wine, which serve as additional attractions to the goddess to set out on her travels.<a href="#note_488" id="noteref_488" name="noteref_488"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">488</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Human scapegoats in Uganda.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Occasionally the scapegoat is a man. For example, from time to time the gods used to warn the King of Uganda that his foes the Banyoro were working magic against him and his people to make them die of disease. To avert such a catastrophe the king would send a scapegoat <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page195">[pg 195]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg195" name="Pg195"/> to the frontier of Bunyoro, the land of the enemy. The scapegoat consisted of either a man and a boy or a woman and her child, chosen because of some mark or bodily defect, which the gods had noted and by which the victims were to be recognized. With the human victims were sent a cow, a goat, a fowl, and a dog; and a strong guard escorted them to the land which the god had indicated. There the limbs of the victims were broken and they were left to die a lingering death in the enemy's country, being too crippled to crawl back to Uganda. The disease or plague was thought to have been thus transferred to the victims and to have been conveyed back in their persons to the land from which it came. So, too, after a war the gods sometimes advised the king to send back a scapegoat in order to free the warriors from some evil that had attached itself to the army. One of the women slaves, a cow, a goat, a fowl, and a dog would be chosen from among the captives and sent back to the borders of the country whence they had come; there they were maimed and left to die. After that the army would be pronounced clean and allowed to return to the capital. In each case a bundle of herbs would be rubbed over the people and the cattle, and would then be tied to the victims, who would thus carry back the evil with them.<a href="#note_489" id="noteref_489" name="noteref_489"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">489</span></span></a> A similar use of scapegoats, human and animal, was regularly made after a King of Uganda had been crowned. Two men were brought to the king; one of them he wounded slightly with an arrow shot from a bow. The man was then sent away, under a strong guard, as a scapegoat to Bunyoro, the enemy's country, and with him were sent a cow, a goat, and a dog. On his sad journey he took with him the dust and ashes of the sacred fire, which had burned day and night at the entrance to the late king's enclosure and had been extinguished, as usual, at his death. Arrived at their destination, the man and the animals were maimed and left to die. They were believed to bear away with them any uncleanness that might cleave to the new King or Queen.<a href="#note_490" id="noteref_490" name="noteref_490"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">490</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page196">[pg 196]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg196" name="Pg196"/>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Human scapegoats in China and India. Indian ceremony of sliding down a rope.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Some of the aboriginal tribes of China, as a protection against pestilence, select a man of great muscular strength to act the part of scapegoat. Having besmeared his face with paint, he performs many antics with the view of enticing all pestilential and noxious influences to attach themselves to him only. He is assisted by a priest. Finally the scapegoat, hotly pursued by men and women beating gongs and tom-toms, is driven with great haste out of the town or village.<a href="#note_491" id="noteref_491" name="noteref_491"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">491</span></span></a> In the Punjaub a cure for the murrain is to hire a man of the Chamar caste, turn his face away from the village, brand him with a red-hot sickle, and let him go out into the jungle taking the murrain with him. He must not look back.<a href="#note_492" id="noteref_492" name="noteref_492"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">492</span></span></a> When disease breaks out among a herd, the Oraons take the herdsman himself, tie a wooden bell from one of the cows round his neck, beat him with sticks, and drive him out of the village to a cross-road, where the bell and sticks are deposited.<a href="#note_493" id="noteref_493" name="noteref_493"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">493</span></span></a> In the territory of Kumaon, lying on the southern slopes of the Western Himalayas, the custom of employing a human scapegoat appears to have taken a somewhat peculiar form in the ceremony known as Barat. First of all a thick rope of grass is stretched from the top of a cliff to the valley beneath, where it is made fast to posts driven into the ground. Next a wooden saddle, with a very sharp ridge and unpadded, is attached by thongs to the cable, along which it runs in a deep groove. A man now seats himself on the saddle and is strapped to it, while sand-bags or heavy stones are suspended from his feet to secure his balance. Then, after various ceremonies have been performed and a kid sacrificed, he throws himself as far back in the saddle as he can go, and is started off to slide down the rope into the valley. Away he shoots at an ever-increasing speed; the saddle under him, however well greased, emits volumes of smoke during the greater part of his progress; and he is nearly senseless when he reaches the bottom. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page197">[pg 197]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg197" name="Pg197"/> Here men are waiting to catch him and run forward with him some distance in order to break gradually the force of his descent. This ceremony, regarded as a propitiation of Mahadeva, is performed as a means of delivering a community from present or impending calamity. Thus, for example, it was performed when cholera was raging at Almora, and the people traced the immunity they enjoyed to the due observance of the rite. Each district has its hereditary Badi, as the performer is called; he is supported by annual contributions in grain from the inhabitants, as well as by special payments for each performance. When the ceremony is over, the grass rope is cut up and distributed among the villagers, who hang the pieces as charms at the eaves of their houses; and they preserve the hair of the Badi for a similar purpose. Yet while his severed locks bring fertility to other people's lands, he entails sterility on his own; and it is firmly believed that no seed sown by his hand could ever sprout. Formerly the rule prevailed that, if a Badi had the misfortune to fall from the rope in the course of his flying descent, he was immediately despatched with a sword by the spectators. The rule has naturally been abolished by the English Government; but its former observance seems to indicate that the custom of letting a man slide down a rope as a charm to avert calamity is only a mitigation of an older custom of putting him to death.<a href="#note_494" id="noteref_494" name="noteref_494"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">494</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Tibetan New Year ceremony of sliding down a rope.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">A somewhat similar ceremony is annually performed at Lhasa a few days after the beginning of the Tibetan New Year, which falls in spring. The scene of the performance is Potala Hill, on the summit and slope of which is built the superb castle of the Grand Lama of Tibet, a massive and imposing pile of buildings which attracts the eye and dominates the landscape from afar. On the day in question a rope of hide is stretched from the top to the bottom of the steep hill, and men from a distant province of Tibet climb up it with the agility of monkeys. They are called Flying <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page198">[pg 198]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg198" name="Pg198"/> Spirits. Arrived at the top, each of them places a piece of wood on his breast, stretches out his hands and feet, and letting himself go shoots down the rope (in the words of a Chinese writer) <span class="tei tei-q">“like the bolt flying from the bow, or the swallow skimming the water. 'Tis a wondrous sight!”</span> Considering that these performers are called Spirits, and that the performance takes place a few days after the New Year, a season so commonly selected for the expulsion of demons, we may conjecture that the Flying Spirits represent the powers of evil who are thus shot out of the Tibetan pope's palace at the beginning of the year.<a href="#note_495" id="noteref_495" name="noteref_495"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">495</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc31" name="toc31"/>
					<a id="pdf32" name="pdf32"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 3. The Periodic Expulsion of Evils in a Material Vehicle.</span>
					</h2>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Periodic expulsion of evils in a material vehicle. Periodic expulsion of spirits in rafts from Perak.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In this last case the expulsion of evils, if I am right in so interpreting the ceremony, is periodic, not occasional, being repeated every spring at the beginning of a new year. It brings us accordingly to the consideration of a whole class of such cases, for the mediate expulsion of evils by means of a scapegoat or other material vehicle, like the immediate expulsion of them in invisible form, tends to become periodic, and for a like reason. Thus in Perak, a state on the west coast of the Malay Peninsula, it was in ancient times the custom to perform periodically a ceremony intended to ensure the prosperity of the country by the propitiation of friendly spirits and the expulsion of evil influences. The writer who records the custom is uncertain as to the period which elapsed between two successive celebrations; he suggests with hesitation that the rite was performed once in seven years or once in a Rajah's reign. The name of the ceremony was <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pĕlas negri</span></span>, which means <span class="tei tei-q">“the cleansing of the country from evils.”</span> When the time came, the Rajah, the chiefs, and a great following of people assembled at a point as far up the river as possible, but short of the rapids which further up impede navigation. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page199">[pg 199]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg199" name="Pg199"/> There a number of rafts were prepared, some of them elaborately built with houses on them. Four of them were devoted to the four great classes of spirits which are found in Perak, namely the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Hantu Blian</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“Tiger-spirits,”</span> the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Hantu Sungkei</span></span>, the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Hantu Malayu</span></span>, and the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Jin Raja</span></span>. In each of these rafts a number of wizards (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">pawangs</span></span>) took up their post, according to the particular class of demon which they affected. The procession was headed by the raft devoted to the Tiger-spirits; and in it was set up a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">prah</span></span> tree with all its branches, kept erect by stays. It was followed by the three rafts dedicated to the other three classes of spirits, and behind them came a train of other rafts bearing mere common mortals, the royal bandsmen, the Rajah himself, the chiefs, and the people. As the long procession floated down the river with the current, the wizards, standing on sheets of tin, waved white cloths and shouted invocations to the spirits and demons who inhabited the country through which the rafts were drifting seaward. The burden of the invocations was to invite the spirits and demons to come aboard the rafts and partake of the food which had been considerately made ready for them. At every village on the bank large enough to possess a mosque (for the Malays of Perak are professing Mohammedans) the procession halted; a buffalo, subscribed for by the inhabitants, was slaughtered, and its head placed on one of the spirit-barks, while people feasted on the flesh. The ceremony ended at Bras Basah, a village on the left bank of the Perak river, not far from its mouth. There the rafts were abandoned to the current, which swept them out to sea,<a href="#note_496" id="noteref_496" name="noteref_496"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">496</span></span></a> doubtless bearing with them the hapless demons who had been lured by the tempting viands to embark and were now left to toss forlorn on the great deep at the mercy of the waves and the winds.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of evils in small ships in the Indian Archipelago.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Again, every year, generally in March, the people of Leti, Moa, and Lakor, islands of the Indian Archipelago, send away all their diseases to sea. They make a proa about six feet long, rig it with sails, oars, rudder, and other gear, and every family deposits in it some rice, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page200">[pg 200]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg200" name="Pg200"/> fruit, a fowl, two eggs, insects that ravage the fields, and so on. Then they let it drift away to sea, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Take away from here all kinds of sickness, take them to other islands, to other lands, distribute them in places that lie eastward, where the sun rises.”</span><a href="#note_497" id="noteref_497" name="noteref_497"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">497</span></span></a> The Biajas of Borneo annually send to sea a little bark laden with the sins and misfortunes of the people. The crew of any ship that falls in with the ill-omened bark at sea will suffer all the sorrows with which it is laden.<a href="#note_498" id="noteref_498" name="noteref_498"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">498</span></span></a> A like custom is annually observed by the Dusuns of the Tuaran district in British North Borneo. The ceremony is the most important of the whole year. Its aim is to bring good luck to the village during the ensuing year by solemnly expelling all the evil spirits that may have collected in or about the houses throughout the last twelve months. The task of routing out the demons and banishing them devolves chiefly on women, who indeed play the principal part in all religious ceremonies among the Dusuns, while the humble duty of beating drums and banging gongs is discharged by members of the inferior sex. On this momentous occasion a procession of women, in full ceremonial dress, goes from house to house, stopping at each to go through their performances. At the head of the procession marches a boy carrying a spear on which is impaled a bundle of palm leaves containing rice. He is followed by two men, who carry a large gong and a drum slung on a pole between them. Then come the women. One of them carries a small sucking pig in a basket on her back; and all of them bear wands, with which they belabour the little pig at the appropriate moment; its squeals help to attract the vagrant spirits. At every house the women dance and sing, clashing castanets or cymbals of brass and jingling bunches of little brass bells in both hands. When the performance has been repeated at every house in the village, the procession defiles down to the river and all the evil spirits, which the performers have chased from the houses, follow them to the edge of the water. There a raft has been made ready and moored to the bank. It contains <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page201">[pg 201]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg201" name="Pg201"/> offerings of food, cloth, cooking-pots, and swords; and the deck is crowded with figures of men, women, animals, and birds, all made out of the leaves of the sago palm. The evil spirits now embark on the raft, and when they are all aboard, it is pushed off and allowed to float down with the current, carrying the demons with it. Should the raft run aground near the village, it is shoved off with all speed, lest the invisible passengers should seize the opportunity of landing and returning to the village. Finally, the sufferings of the little pig, whose squeals served to decoy the demons from their lurking-places, are terminated by death, for it is killed and its carcase thrown away.<a href="#note_499" id="noteref_499" name="noteref_499"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">499</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of demons in little ships in the Nicobar Islands.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Every year, at the beginning of the dry season, the Nicobar Islanders carry the model of a ship through their villages. The devils are chased out of the huts, and driven on board the little ship, which is then launched and suffered to sail away with the wind.<a href="#note_500" id="noteref_500" name="noteref_500"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">500</span></span></a> The ceremony has been described by a catechist, who witnessed it at Car Nicobar in July 1897. For three days the people were busy preparing two very large floating cars, shaped like canoes, fitted with sails, and loaded with certain leaves, which possessed the valuable property of expelling devils. While the young people were thus engaged, the exorcists and the elders sat in a house singing songs by turns; but often they would come forth, pace the beach armed with rods, and forbid the devil to enter the village. The fourth day of the solemnity bore the name of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Intō-nga-Sĭya</span></span>, which means <span class="tei tei-q">“Expelling the Devil by Sails.”</span> In the evening all the villagers assembled, the women bringing baskets of ashes and bunches of devil-expelling leaves. These leaves were then distributed to everybody, old and young. When all was ready, a band of robust men, attended by a guard of exorcists, carried one of the cars down to the sea on the right side of the village graveyard, and set it floating in the water. As soon as they had returned, another band of men carried the other car to the beach and floated it similarly in the sea to the left of the graveyard. The demon-laden <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page202">[pg 202]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg202" name="Pg202"/> barks being now launched, the women threw ashes from the shore, and the whole crowd shouted, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Fly away, devil, fly away, never come again!”</span> The wind and the tide being favourable, the canoes sailed quickly away; and that night all the people feasted together with great joy, because the devil had departed in the direction of Chowra. A similar expulsion of devils takes place once a year in other Nicobar villages; but the ceremonies are held at different times in different places.<a href="#note_501" id="noteref_501" name="noteref_501"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">501</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of embodied evils in India, China, and Corea. Annual expulsion or destruction of demons embodied in images in Tibet.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At Sucla-Tirtha, in India, an earthen pot containing the accumulated sins of the people is (annually?) set adrift on the river. Legend says that the custom originated with a wicked priest who, after atoning for his guilt by a course of austerities and expiatory ceremonies, was directed to sail upon the river in a boat with white sails. If the white sails turned black, it would be a sign that his sins were forgiven him. They did so, and he joyfully allowed the boat to drift with his sins to sea.<a href="#note_502" id="noteref_502" name="noteref_502"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">502</span></span></a> Amongst many of the aboriginal tribes of China, a great festival is celebrated in the third month of every year. It is held by way of a general rejoicing over what the people believe to be a total annihilation of the ills of the past twelve months. The destruction is supposed to be effected in the following way. A large earthenware jar filled with gunpowder, stones, and bits of iron is buried in the earth. A train of gunpowder, communicating with the jar, is then laid; and a match being applied, the jar and its contents are blown up. The stones and bits of iron represent the ills and disasters of the past year, and the dispersion of them by the explosion is believed to remove the ills and disasters themselves. The festival is attended with much revelling and drunkenness.<a href="#note_503" id="noteref_503" name="noteref_503"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">503</span></span></a> On New Year's Day people in Corea seek to rid themselves of all their distresses by painting images on paper, writing against them their troubles of body or mind, and afterwards giving the papers to a boy to burn. Another method of effecting the same object at the same season is to make rude dolls of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page203">[pg 203]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg203" name="Pg203"/> straw, stuff them with a few copper coins, and throw them into the street. Whoever picks up such an effigy gets all the troubles and thereby relieves the original sufferer.<a href="#note_504" id="noteref_504" name="noteref_504"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">504</span></span></a> Again, on the fourteenth day of the first month the Coreans fly paper kites inscribed with a wish that all the ills of the year may fly away with them.<a href="#note_505" id="noteref_505" name="noteref_505"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">505</span></span></a> Mr. George Bogle, the English envoy sent to Tibet by Warren Hastings, witnessed the celebration of the Tibetan New Year's Day at Teshu Lumbo, the capital of the Teshu Lama. Monks walked in procession round the court to the music of cymbals, tabors, trumpets, hautboys and drums. Then others, clad in masquerade dress and wearing masks which represented the heads of animals, mostly wild beasts, danced with antic motions. <span class="tei tei-q">“After this, the figure of a man, chalked upon paper, was laid upon the ground. Many strange ceremonies, which to me who did not understand them appeared whimsical, were performed about it; and a great fire being kindled in a corner of the court, it was at length held over it, and being formed of combustibles, vanished with much smoke and explosion. I was told it was a figure of the devil.”</span><a href="#note_506" id="noteref_506" name="noteref_506"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">506</span></span></a> Another Tibetan mode of expelling demons from a dwelling is to make a paste image, into which the lamas by their incantations conjure all the evil spirits that may be lurking in the house. This image is carried to a distance by a runner and thrown away. He is attended by men, who shout at the top of their voices, brandish swords, and fire guns, all to frighten the demons and drive them far from human habitations.<a href="#note_507" id="noteref_507" name="noteref_507"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">507</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Biennial expulsion of demons embodied in effigies at Old Calabar.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">At Old Calabar on the coast of Guinea, the devils and ghosts are, or used to be, publicly expelled once in two years. Among the spirits thus driven from their haunts are the souls of all the people who died since the last lustration of the town. About three weeks or a month before the expulsion, which according to one account takes place in <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page204">[pg 204]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg204" name="Pg204"/> the month of November, rude effigies representing men and animals, such as crocodiles, leopards, elephants, bullocks, and birds, are made of wicker-work or wood, and being hung with strips of cloth and bedizened with gew-gaws, are set before the door of every house. About three o'clock in the morning of the day appointed for the ceremony the whole population turns out into the streets, and proceeds with a deafening uproar and in a state of the wildest excitement to drive all lurking devils and ghosts into the effigies, in order that they may be banished with them from the abodes of men. For this purpose bands of people roam through the streets knocking on doors, firing guns, beating drums, blowing on horns, ringing bells, clattering pots and pans, shouting and hallooing with might and main, in short making all the noise it is possible for them to raise. The hubbub goes on till the approach of dawn, when it gradually subsides and ceases altogether at sunrise. By this time the houses have been thoroughly swept, and all the frightened spirits are supposed to have huddled into the effigies or their fluttering drapery. In these wicker figures are also deposited the sweepings of the houses and the ashes of yesterday's fires. Then the demon-laden images are hastily snatched up, carried in tumultuous procession down to the brink of the river, and thrown into the water to the tuck of drums. The ebb-tide bears them away seaward, and thus the town is swept clean of ghosts and devils for another two years. This biennial expulsion of spirits goes by the name of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ndok</span></span>, and the effigies by which it is effected are called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nabikem</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nabikim</span></span>.<a href="#note_508" id="noteref_508" name="noteref_508"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">508</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page205">[pg 205]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg205" name="Pg205"/>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of demons embodied in effigies at Porto Novo.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Further to the west similar ceremonies are or were till recently enacted at Porto Novo, the seaport of Dahomey. One of them has been described by an eye-witness, a Catholic missionary, who interpreted the rites as a Funeral of Death. He says: <span class="tei tei-q">“Some time ago a curious event took place: the King had commanded to celebrate the funeral of Death. Every year, at the season of the rains, the predecessors of his sable Majesty, in order to preserve the life of their dear subjects, had caused the fetish of that terrible and pitiless enemy, who spares not even kings, to be drowned in the lagoon. Toffa wished to comply with the traditions of his ancestors.”</span> However, the ceremony as described by the missionary seems to conform closely to the type of the expulsion of ghosts and demons. Two days before the crowning act of the celebration the streets were carefully swept and all the filth which usually encumbered them was removed, <span class="tei tei-q">“lest Death should there find a refuge.”</span> All the people from the neighbouring villages assembled; their fetishes, daubed with red paint, were carried in great pomp through the streets of the capital attended by noisy processions of mummers. A great multitude passed the night in the public square, drinking, singing, and shouting. Finally, a number of rude and hideous effigies were escorted by a noisy crowd to the shore of the lagoon; there canoes were waiting to receive them and paddle them out to deep water, where they were flung overboard. These effigies the missionary regarded as so many images of Death, who thus received his passport and was dismissed from the territory of Porto Novo. But more probably they represented the hosts of demons and ghosts who were believed to lurk about the town and to massacre people under the form of sickness and disease. Having made a clean sweep of the whole baleful crew the inhabitants no doubt thought that they had removed the principal, if not the only, cause of death, and that accordingly they had taken out a new lease of life.<a href="#note_509" id="noteref_509" name="noteref_509"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">509</span></span></a> It is not without interest to observe that in cleansing their streets the people did actually retrench one of the most fruitful sources of disease and death, especially in the sweltering <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page206">[pg 206]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg206" name="Pg206"/> heat of a damp tropical climate; hence the measures they took for the prolongation of their lives were really to a certain extent effectual, though they did not accomplish their object in the precise way they imagined. So curiously does it often happen that the savage reaches the goal of his wishes by a road which to civilized man might appear at first sight to lead far away from it.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of embodied evils among the Hos of Togoland.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Before the Hos of Togoland, to the west of Dahomey, celebrate their festival of the new yams, which has been described in another part of this work,<a href="#note_510" id="noteref_510" name="noteref_510"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">510</span></span></a> they say that it is necessary to clean the town and to put it in order. The way in which they do so is this. They take leaves of two particular sorts of trees (the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">adzu</span></span> and the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wo</span></span>), together with creepers and ashes, and bind all the leaves fast to a pole of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">adzu</span></span> tree. As they do so they pray or command the evil spirits, the witches, and all other evils in the town to enter into the band and be bound with it. Then they make a paste out of the ashes mixed with urine and smear it on the bundle of leaves, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“We smear it on the face of the Evil Ones who are in this bundle, in order that they may not be able to see any more.”</span> Then they throw the bundle on the ground and mock at it. Next they take all the similar poles, wrapt in creepers, in which they have bound up all the evil powers, and carry them out of the town and stick them in the ground on the various roads leading into the town. When they have done this, they say that they have driven the evils out of the town and shut the door against them. After that they wash the faces of all the people with a medicine which has been prepared by the oldest men. Thereupon they all return home to sweep out their houses and yards; they sweep even the ground in front of the yards, so that the whole town is thoroughly clean. All the grass-stalks and refuse of stock-yams which have been swept together are carried out of the town, and the people rail at the stock-yams. In the course of the night the oldest men assemble and tie a toad to a young palm-leaf. They say that they wish now to sweep the town and finish the ceremony. So they drag the toad behind them through the whole town in the direction of Mount <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page207">[pg 207]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg207" name="Pg207"/> Adaklu. When that has been done, the priests say that they will now remove the sicknesses. In the evening they give public notice that they are about to take to the road, so nobody may light a fire on the hearth or eat. At dead of night, when people are asleep, three men go through the town. One of them drags behind them a toad fastened to a bunch of herbs; another carries a calabash of holy herbs and water, with which he sprinkles the streets; and the third whistles softly. As soon as they have thus passed through the whole town, they throw away the toad and the holy herbs in the direction of Mount Adaklu. Next morning the women sweep out their houses and hearths and set the sweepings on broken wooden plates. Many put on torn mats or torn clothes; others tie grasses and creepers about them. While they do so, they pray, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“All ye sicknesses which are in our body and plague us, we are come this day to cast you out!”</span> When they set out so to do, the priest commands every man to cry out thrice and thereby to smite himself on the mouth. In a moment they all cry out, smite themselves on the mouth, and run as fast as their legs can carry them in the direction of Mount Adaklu. As they run, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“Out to-day! Out to-day! What kills anybody, out to-day! Ye evil spirits, out to-day! And all that makes our heads to ache, out to-day! Anlo and Adaklu are the places whither all evil ought to go.”</span> Now on Mount Adaklu there stands a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">klo</span></span> tree; and when they have come thither they throw everything away and return home. After their return every man washes himself with the medicine which is set forth for that purpose in the public street; then he goes into his house. Such is the ceremony by which the Hos prepare themselves to eat the new yams.<a href="#note_511" id="noteref_511" name="noteref_511"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">511</span></span></a> Thus among the Hos the public expulsion of evils is definitely connected with the crops and therefore takes place every year, not every two years, as at Old Calabar.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of embodied evils among the gypsies.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Similar annual expulsions of embodied evils are not unknown in Europe. On the evening of Easter Sunday <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page208">[pg 208]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg208" name="Pg208"/> the gypsies of Southern Europe take a wooden vessel like a band-box, which rests cradle-wise on two cross pieces of wood. In this they place herbs and simples, together with the dried carcase of a snake, or lizard, which every person present must first have touched with his fingers. The vessel is then wrapt in white and red wool, carried by the oldest man from tent to tent, and finally thrown into running water, not, however, before every member of the band has spat into it once, and the sorceress has uttered some spells over it. They believe that by performing this ceremony they dispel all the illnesses that would otherwise have afflicted them in the course of the year; and that if any one finds the vessel and opens it out of curiosity, he and his will be visited by all the maladies which the others have escaped.<a href="#note_512" id="noteref_512" name="noteref_512"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">512</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of evils in an animal scapegoat among the Garos of Assam.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The scapegoat by means of which the accumulated ills of a whole year are publicly expelled is sometimes an animal. For example, among the Garos of Assam, <span class="tei tei-q">“besides the sacrifices for individual cases of illness, there are certain ceremonies which are observed once a year by a whole community or village, and are intended to safeguard its members from dangers of the forest, and from sickness and mishap during the coming twelve months. The principal of these is the Asongtata ceremony. Close to the outskirts of every big village a number of stones may be noticed stuck into the ground, apparently without order or method. These are known by the name of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">asong</span></span>, and on them is offered the sacrifice which the Asongtata demands. The sacrifice of a goat takes place, and a month later, that of a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">langur</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Entellus</span></span> monkey) or a bamboo-rat is considered necessary. The animal chosen has a rope fastened round its neck and is led by two men, one on each side of it, to every house in the village. It is taken inside each house in turn, the assembled villagers, meanwhile, beating the walls from the outside, to frighten and drive out any evil spirits which may have taken up their residence within. The round of the village having been made in this manner, the monkey or rat is led to the outskirts of the village, killed by a blow of a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">dao</span></span>, which disembowels it, and then crucified on bamboos set up in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page209">[pg 209]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg209" name="Pg209"/> ground. Round the crucified animal long, sharp bamboo stakes are placed, which form <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">chevaux de frise</span></span> round about it. These commemorate the days when such defences surrounded the villages on all sides to keep off human enemies, and they are now a symbol to ward off sickness and dangers to life from the wild animals of the forest. The <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">langur</span></span> required for the purpose is hunted down some days before, but should it be found impossible to catch one, a brown monkey may take its place; a hulock may not be used.”</span><a href="#note_513" id="noteref_513" name="noteref_513"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">513</span></span></a> Here the crucified ape or rat is the public scapegoat, which by its vicarious sufferings and death relieves the people from all sickness and mishap in the coming year.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Dogs as scapegoats in India, Scotland and America. The Jewish scapegoat.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Again, on one day of the year the Bhotiyas of Juhar, in the Western Himalayas, take a dog, intoxicate him with spirits and bhang or hemp, and having fed him with sweetmeats, lead him round the village and let him loose. They then chase and kill him with sticks and stones, and believe that, when they have done so, no disease or misfortune will visit the village during the year.<a href="#note_514" id="noteref_514" name="noteref_514"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">514</span></span></a> In some parts of Breadalbane it was formerly the custom on New Year's Day to take a dog to the door, give him a bit of bread, and drive him out, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Get away, you dog! Whatever death of men or loss of cattle would happen in this house to the end of the present year, may it all light on your head!”</span><a href="#note_515" id="noteref_515" name="noteref_515"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">515</span></span></a> It appears that the white dogs annually sacrificed by the Iroquois at their New Year Festival are, or have been, regarded as scapegoats. According to Mr. J. V. H. Clark, who witnessed the ceremony in January 1841, on the first day of the festival all the fires in the village were extinguished, the ashes scattered to the winds, and a new fire kindled with flint and steel. On a subsequent day, men dressed in fantastic costumes went round the village, gathering the sins of the people. When the morning of the last day of the festival was come, two white dogs, decorated with red paint, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page210">[pg 210]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg210" name="Pg210"/> wampum, feathers, and ribbons, were led out. They were soon strangled, and hung on a ladder. Firing and yelling succeeded, and half an hour later the animals were taken into a house, <span class="tei tei-q">“where the people's sins were transferred to them.”</span> The carcases were afterwards burnt on a pyre of wood.<a href="#note_516" id="noteref_516" name="noteref_516"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">516</span></span></a> According to the Rev. Mr. Kirkland, who wrote in the eighteenth century, the ashes of the pyre upon which one of the white dogs was burnt were carried through the village and sprinkled at the door of every house.<a href="#note_517" id="noteref_517" name="noteref_517"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">517</span></span></a> Formerly, however, as we have seen, the Iroquois expulsion of evils was immediate and not by scapegoat.<a href="#note_518" id="noteref_518" name="noteref_518"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">518</span></span></a> On the Day of Atonement, which was the tenth day of the seventh month, the Jewish high-priest laid both his hands on the head of a live goat, confessed over it all the iniquities of the Children of Israel, and, having thereby transferred the sins of the people to the beast, sent it away into the wilderness.<a href="#note_519" id="noteref_519" name="noteref_519"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">519</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Human scapegoats formerly put to death every year in Africa.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The scapegoat upon whom the sins of the people are periodically laid, may also be a human being. At Onitsha, on the Niger, two human beings used to be annually sacrificed to take away the sins of the land. The victims were purchased by public subscription. All persons who, during the past year, had fallen into gross sins, such as <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page211">[pg 211]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg211" name="Pg211"/> incendiarism, theft, adultery, witchcraft, and so forth, were expected to contribute 28 <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ngugas</span></span>, or a little over £2. The money thus collected was taken into the interior of the country and expended in the purchase of two sickly persons <span class="tei tei-q">“to be offered as a sacrifice for all these abominable crimes—one for the land and one for the river.”</span> A man from a neighbouring town was hired to put them to death. On the twenty-seventh of February 1858 the Rev. J. C. Taylor witnessed the sacrifice of one of these victims. The sufferer was a woman, about nineteen or twenty years of age. They dragged her alive along the ground, face downwards, from the king's house to the river, a distance of two miles, the crowds who accompanied her crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wickedness! wickedness!”</span> The intention was <span class="tei tei-q">“to take away the iniquities of the land. The body was dragged along in a merciless manner, as if the weight of all their wickedness was thus carried away.”</span><a href="#note_520" id="noteref_520" name="noteref_520"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">520</span></span></a> Similar customs are said to be still secretly practised every year by many tribes on the delta of the Niger in spite of the vigilance of the British Government.<a href="#note_521" id="noteref_521" name="noteref_521"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">521</span></span></a> Among the Yoruba negroes of West Africa <span class="tei tei-q">“the human victim chosen for sacrifice, and who may be either a free-born or a slave, a person of noble or wealthy parentage, or one of humble birth, is, after he has been chosen and marked out for the purpose, called an <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Oluwo</span></span>. He is always well fed and nourished and supplied with whatever he should desire during the period of his confinement. When the occasion arrives for him to be sacrificed and offered up, he is commonly led about and paraded through the streets of the town or city of the Sovereign who would sacrifice him for the well-being of his government and of every family and individual under it, in order that he might carry off the sin, guilt, misfortune and death of all without exception. Ashes and chalk would be employed to hide his identity by the one being freely thrown over his head, and his face painted with the latter, whilst individuals would often rush out of their <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page212">[pg 212]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg212" name="Pg212"/> houses to lay their hands upon him that they might thus transfer to him their sin, guilt, trouble, and death. This parading done, he is taken through a temporary sacred shed of palm and other tree branches, and especially of the former, the Igbodu<a href="#note_522" id="noteref_522" name="noteref_522"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">522</span></span></a> and to its first division, where many persons might follow him, and through a second where only the chiefs and other very important persons might escort and accompany him to, and to a third where only the Babalawo [priest] and his official assistant, the Ajigbona, are permitted to enter with him. Here, after he himself has given out or started his last song, which is to be taken up by the large assembly of people who will have been waiting to hear his last word or his last groan, his head is taken off and his blood offered to the gods. The announcement of his last word or his last groan heard and taken up by the people, would be a signal for joy, gladness, and thanksgiving, and for drum beating and dancing, as an expression of their gratification because their sacrifice has been accepted, the divine wrath is appeased, and the prospect of prosperity or increased prosperity assured.”</span><a href="#note_523" id="noteref_523" name="noteref_523"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">523</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Human scapegoats formerly put to death every year in Siam. Annual human scapegoats in Japan and Sumatra.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Siam it used to be the custom on one day of the year to single out a woman broken down by debauchery, and carry her on a litter through all the streets to the music of drums and hautboys. The mob insulted her and pelted her with dirt; and after having carried her through the whole city, they threw her on a dunghill or a hedge of thorns outside the ramparts, forbidding her ever to enter the walls again. They believed that the woman thus drew upon herself all the malign influences of the air and of evil spirits.<a href="#note_524" id="noteref_524" name="noteref_524"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">524</span></span></a> In Japan the <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja"><span style="font-style: italic">tsuina</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja"><span style="font-style: italic">oni-yarahi</span></span>, that is to say, demon expelling, is a sort of drama in which disease, or more generally ill-luck, is personified, and driven away with threats <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page213">[pg 213]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg213" name="Pg213"/> and a show of violence. Like the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja"><span style="font-style: italic">oho-harahi</span></span>,<a href="#note_525" id="noteref_525" name="noteref_525"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">525</span></span></a> it was performed on the last day of the year. This association is only natural. The demons of the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja"><span style="font-style: italic">tsuina</span></span> are personified wintry influences, with the diseases which they bring with them, while the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja"><span style="font-style: italic">oho-harahi</span></span> is intended to cleanse the people from sin and uncleanness, things closely related to disease, as well as from disease itself. Though probably of Chinese origin, the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="ja" xml:lang="ja"><span style="font-style: italic">tsuina</span></span> is a tolerably ancient rite. It is alluded to in the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nihongi</span></span> under the date <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> 689. It was at one time performed at Court on an imposing scale. Four bands of twenty youths, each wearing a four-eyed mask, and each carrying a halberd in the left hand, marched simultaneously from the four gates of the palace, driving the devils before them. Another account of this ceremony says that a man disguised himself as the demon of pestilence, in which garb he was shot at and driven off by the courtiers armed with peach-wood bows and arrows of reed. Peach-wood staves were used for the same purpose. There was formerly a practice at Asakusa in Tokio on the last day of the year for a man got up as a devil to be chased round the pagoda there by another wearing a mask. After this 3,000 tickets were scrambled for by the spectators. These were carried away and pasted up over the doors as a charm against pestilence.”</span><a href="#note_526" id="noteref_526" name="noteref_526"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">526</span></span></a> The Battas of Sumatra offer either a red horse or a buffalo as a public sacrifice to purify the land and obtain the favour of the gods. Formerly, it is said, a man was bound to the same stake as the buffalo, and when they killed the animal, the man was driven away; no one might receive him, converse with him, or give him food.<a href="#note_527" id="noteref_527" name="noteref_527"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">527</span></span></a> Doubtless he <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page214">[pg 214]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg214" name="Pg214"/> was supposed to carry away the sins and misfortunes of the people.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual human scapegoats in Europe. The expulsion of Posterli in Switzerland.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Human scapegoats, as we shall see presently, were well known in classical antiquity, and even in mediæval Europe the custom seems not to have been wholly extinct. In the town of Halberstadt, in Thüringen, there was a church said to have been founded by Charlemagne. In this church every year they chose a man, who was believed to be stained with heinous sins. On the first day of Lent he was brought to the church, dressed in mourning garb, with his head muffled up. At the close of the service he was turned out of the church. During the forty days of Lent he perambulated the city barefoot, neither entering the churches nor speaking to any one. The canons took it in turn to feed him. After midnight he was allowed to sleep in the streets. On the day before Good Friday, after the consecration of the holy oil, he was readmitted to the church and absolved from his sins. The people gave him money. He was called Adam, and was now believed to be in a state of innocence.<a href="#note_528" id="noteref_528" name="noteref_528"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">528</span></span></a> At Entlebuch, in Switzerland, down to the close of the eighteenth century, the custom of annually expelling a scapegoat was preserved in the ceremony of driving <span class="tei tei-q">“Posterli”</span> from the village into the lands of the neighbouring village. <span class="tei tei-q">“Posterli”</span> was represented by a lad disguised as an old witch or as a goat or an ass. Amid a deafening noise of horns, clarionets, bells, whips, and so forth, he was driven out. Sometimes <span class="tei tei-q">“Posterli”</span> was represented by a puppet, which was drawn on a sledge and left in a corner of the neighbouring village. The ceremony took place on the Thursday evening of the last week but one before Christmas.<a href="#note_529" id="noteref_529" name="noteref_529"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">529</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual expulsion of the devil, personified by a man, from Munich on Ascension Day.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Munich down to about a hundred years ago the expulsion of the devil from the city used to be annually enacted on Ascension Day. On the Eve of Ascension Day a man disguised as a devil was chased through the streets, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page215">[pg 215]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg215" name="Pg215"/> which were then narrow and dirty in contrast to the broad, well-kept thoroughfares, lined with imposing buildings, which now distinguish the capital of Bavaria. His pursuers were dressed as witches and wizards and provided with the indispensable crutches, brooms, and pitchforks which make up the outfit of these uncanny beings. While the devil fled before them, the troop of maskers made after him with wild whoops and halloos, and when they overtook him they ducked him in puddles or rolled him on dunghills. In this way the demon at last succeeded in reaching the palace, where he put off his hideous and now filthy disguise and was rewarded for his vicarious sufferings by a copious meal. The devilish costume which he had thrown off was then stuffed with hay and straw and conveyed to a particular church (the Frauenkirche), where it was kept over night, being hung by a rope from a window in the tower. On the afternoon of Ascension Day, before the Vesper service began, an image of the Saviour was drawn up to the roof of the church, no doubt to symbolize the event which the day commemorates. Then burning tow and wafers were thrown on the people. Meantime the effigy of the devil, painted black, with a pair of horns and a lolling red tongue, had been dangling from the church tower, to the delight of a gaping crowd of spectators gathered before the church. It was now flung down into their midst, and a fierce struggle for possession of it took place among the rabble. Finally, it was carried out of the town by the Isar gate and burned on a neighbouring height, <span class="tei tei-q">“in order that the foul fiend might do no harm to the city.”</span> The custom died out at Munich towards the end of the eighteenth century; but it is said that similar ceremonies are observed to this day in some villages of Upper Bavaria.<a href="#note_530" id="noteref_530" name="noteref_530"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">530</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The pardoned criminal at Rouen on Ascension Day may have been a public scapegoat.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This quaint ceremony suggests that the pardoned criminal who used to play the principal part in a solemn religious procession on Ascension Day at Rouen<a href="#note_531" id="noteref_531" name="noteref_531"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">531</span></span></a> may in like manner have originally served, if not as a representative <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page216">[pg 216]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg216" name="Pg216"/> of the devil, at least as a public scapegoat, who relieved the whole people of their sins and sorrows for a year by taking them upon himself. This would explain why the gaol had to be raked in order to furnish one who would parade with the highest ecclesiastical dignitaries in their gorgeous vestments through the streets of Rouen, while the church bells pealed out, the clergy chanted, banners waved, and every circumstance combined to enhance the pomp and splendour of the pageant. It would add a pathetic significance to the crowning act of the ceremony, when on a lofty platform in the public square, with the eyes of a great and silent multitude turned upon him, the condemned malefactor received from the Church the absolution and remission of his sins; for if the rite is to be interpreted in the way here suggested, the sins which were thus forgiven were those not of one man only but of the whole people. No wonder, then, that when the sinner, now a sinner no more, rose from his knees and thrice lifted the silver shrine of St. Romain in his arms, the whole vast assembly in the square broke out into joyous cries of <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">Noel! Noel! Noel!</span></span>”</span> which they understood to signify, <span class="tei tei-q">“God be with us!”</span> In Christian countries no more appropriate season could be selected for the ceremony of the human scapegoat than Ascension Day, which commemorates the departure from earth of Him who, in the belief of millions, took away the sins of the world.<a href="#note_532" id="noteref_532" name="noteref_532"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">532</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Divine animals as scapegoats in India and ancient Egypt.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Sometimes the scapegoat is a divine animal. The people of Malabar share the Hindoo reverence for the cow, to kill and eat which <span class="tei tei-q">“they esteem to be a crime as heinous as homicide or wilful murder.”</span> Nevertheless the <span class="tei tei-q">“Bramans transfer the sins of the people into one or more Cows, which are then carry'd away, both the Cows and the Sins wherewith these Beasts are charged, to what place the Braman shall appoint.”</span><a href="#note_533" id="noteref_533" name="noteref_533"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">533</span></span></a> When the ancient Egyptians sacrificed a bull, they invoked upon its head all the evils that might otherwise befall themselves and the land of Egypt, and thereupon they either sold the bull's head to the Greeks or cast it into the river.<a href="#note_534" id="noteref_534" name="noteref_534"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">534</span></span></a> Now, it cannot be said that in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page217">[pg 217]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg217" name="Pg217"/> times known to us the Egyptians worshipped bulls in general, for they seem to have commonly killed and eaten them.<a href="#note_535" id="noteref_535" name="noteref_535"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">535</span></span></a> But a good many circumstances point to the conclusion that originally all cattle, bulls as well as cows, were held sacred by the Egyptians. For not only were all cows esteemed holy by them and never sacrificed, but even bulls might not be sacrificed unless they had certain natural marks; a priest examined every bull before it was sacrificed; if it had the proper marks, he put his seal on the animal in token that it might be sacrificed; and if a man sacrificed a bull which had not been sealed, he was put to death. Moreover, the worship of the black bulls Apis and Mnevis, especially the former, played an important part in Egyptian religion; all bulls that died a natural death were carefully buried in the suburbs of the cities, and their bones were afterwards collected from all parts of Egypt and interred in a single spot; and at the sacrifice of a bull in the great rites of Isis all the worshippers beat their breasts and mourned.<a href="#note_536" id="noteref_536" name="noteref_536"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">536</span></span></a> On the whole, then, we are perhaps entitled to infer that bulls were originally, as cows were always, esteemed sacred by the Egyptians, and that the slain bull upon whose head they laid the misfortunes of the people was once a divine scapegoat. It seems not improbable that the lamb annually slain by the Madis of Central Africa is a divine scapegoat, and the same supposition may partly explain the Zuni sacrifice of the turtle.<a href="#note_537" id="noteref_537" name="noteref_537"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">537</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Divine men as scapegoats among the Gonds of India and the Albanians of the Caucasus.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Lastly, the scapegoat may be a divine man. Thus, in November the Gonds of India worship Ghansyam Deo, the protector of the crops, and at the festival the god himself is said to descend on the head of one of the worshippers, who is suddenly seized with a kind of fit and, after staggering about, rushes off into the jungle, where it is believed that, if left to himself, he would die mad. However, they bring him back, but he does not recover his senses for one or two days. The people think that one man is thus singled out as a scapegoat <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page218">[pg 218]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg218" name="Pg218"/> for the sins of the rest of the village.<a href="#note_538" id="noteref_538" name="noteref_538"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">538</span></span></a> In the temple of the Moon the Albanians of the Eastern Caucasus kept a number of sacred slaves, of whom many were inspired and prophesied. When one of these men exhibited more than usual symptoms of inspiration or insanity, and wandered solitary up and down the woods, like the Gond in the jungle, the high priest had him bound with a sacred chain and maintained him in luxury for a year. At the end of the year he was anointed with unguents and led forth to be sacrificed. A man whose business it was to slay these human victims and to whom practice had given dexterity, advanced from the crowd and thrust a sacred spear into the victim's side, piercing his heart. From the manner in which the slain man fell, omens were drawn as to the welfare of the commonwealth. Then the body was carried to a certain spot where all the people stood upon it as a purificatory ceremony.<a href="#note_539" id="noteref_539" name="noteref_539"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">539</span></span></a> This last circumstance clearly indicates that the sins of the people were transferred to the victim, just as the Jewish priest transferred the sins of the people to the scapegoat by laying his hands on the animal's head; and since the man was believed to be possessed by the divine spirit, we have here an undoubted example of a man-god slain to take away the sins and misfortunes of the people.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Annual human scapegoats in Tibet. The Jalno, the temporary ruler of Lhasa.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">In Tibet the ceremony of the scapegoat presents some remarkable features. The Tibetan new year begins with the new moon which appears about the fifteenth of February. For twenty-three days afterwards the government of Lhasa, the capital, is taken out of the hands of the ordinary rulers and entrusted to the monk of the Debang monastery who offers to pay the highest sum for the privilege. The successful bidder is called the Jalno, and he announces his accession to power in person, going through the streets of Lhasa with a silver stick in his hand. Monks from all the neighbouring monasteries and temples assemble to pay him homage. The Jalno exercises his authority in the most arbitrary manner for his own benefit, as all the fines which <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page219">[pg 219]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg219" name="Pg219"/> he exacts are his by purchase. The profit he makes is about ten times the amount of the purchase money. His men go about the streets in order to discover any conduct on the part of the inhabitants that can be found fault with. Every house in Lhasa is taxed at this time, and the slightest offence is punished with unsparing rigour by fines. This severity of the Jalno drives all working classes out of the city till the twenty-three days are over. But if the laity go out, the clergy come in. All the Buddhist monasteries of the country for miles round about open their gates and disgorge their inmates. All the roads that lead down into Lhasa from the neighbouring mountains are full of monks hurrying to the capital, some on foot, some on horseback, some riding asses or lowing oxen, all carrying their prayer-books and culinary utensils. In such multitudes do they come that the streets and squares of the city are encumbered with their swarms, and incarnadined with their red cloaks. The disorder and confusion are indescribable. Bands of the holy men traverse the streets chanting prayers or uttering wild cries. They meet, they jostle, they quarrel, they fight; bloody noses, black eyes, and broken heads are freely given and received. All day long, too, from before the peep of dawn till after darkness has fallen, these red-cloaked monks hold services in the dim incense-laden air of the great Machindranath temple, the cathedral of Lhasa; and thither they crowd thrice a day to receive their doles of tea and soup and money. The cathedral is a vast building, standing in the centre of the city, and surrounded by bazaars and shops. The idols in it are richly inlaid with gold and precious stones.</p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Jalno and the King of the Years. Expulsion of the King of the Years.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Twenty-four days after the Jalno has ceased to have authority, he assumes it again, and for ten days acts in the same arbitrary manner as before. On the first of the ten days the priests again assemble at the cathedral, pray to the gods to prevent sickness and other evils among the people, <span class="tei tei-q">“and, as a peace-offering, sacrifice one man. The man is not killed purposely, but the ceremony he undergoes often proves fatal.<a href="#note_540" id="noteref_540" name="noteref_540"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">540</span></span></a> Grain is thrown against <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page220">[pg 220]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg220" name="Pg220"/> his head, and his face is painted half white, half black.”</span> Thus grotesquely disguised, and carrying a coat of skin on his arm, he is called the King of the Years, and sits daily in the market-place, where he helps himself to whatever he likes and goes about shaking a black yak's tail over the people, who thus transfer their bad luck to him. On the tenth day, all the troops in Lhasa march to the great temple and form in line before it. The King of the Years is brought forth from the temple and receives small donations from the assembled multitude. He then ridicules the Jalno, saying to him, <span class="tei tei-q">“What we perceive through the five senses is no illusion. All you teach is untrue,”</span> and the like. The Jalno, who represents the Grand Lama for the time being, contests these heretical opinions; the dispute waxes warm, and at last both agree to decide the questions at issue by a cast of the dice, the Jalno offering to change places with the scapegoat should the throw be against him. If the King of the Years wins, much evil is prognosticated; but if the Jalno wins, there is great rejoicing, for it proves that his adversary has been accepted by the gods as a victim to bear all the sins of the people of Lhasa. Fortune, however, always favours the Jalno, who throws sixes with unvarying success, while his opponent turns up only ones. Nor is this so extraordinary as at first sight it might appear; for the Jalno's dice are marked with nothing but sixes and his adversary's with nothing but ones. When he sees the finger of Providence thus plainly pointed against him, the King of the Years is terrified and flees away upon a white horse, with a white dog, a white bird, salt, and so forth, which have all been provided for him by the government. His face is still painted half white and half black, and he still wears his leathern coat. The whole populace pursues him, hooting, yelling, and firing blank shots in volleys after him. Thus driven out of the city, he is detained for seven days in the great chamber of horrors at the Samyas monastery, surrounded by monstrous and terrific images of devils and skins of huge serpents and wild beasts. Thence he goes away into the mountains of Chetang, where he has to remain an outcast for several months or a year in a narrow den. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page221">[pg 221]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg221" name="Pg221"/> If he dies before the time is out, the people say it is an auspicious omen; but if he survives, he may return to Lhasa and play the part of scapegoat over again the following year.<a href="#note_541" id="noteref_541" name="noteref_541"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">541</span></span></a></p>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Grand Lama, the Jalno, and the King of the Years in their relations to each other. Probability that of old the Tibetan scapegoat was put to death as a substitute for the Grand Lama.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">This quaint ceremonial, still annually observed in the secluded capital of Buddhism—the Rome of Asia—is interesting because it exhibits, in a clearly marked religious stratification, a series of divine redeemers themselves redeemed, of vicarious sacrifices vicariously atoned for, of gods undergoing a process of fossilization, who, while they retain the privileges, have disburdened themselves of the pains and penalties of divinity. In the Jalno we may without undue straining discern a successor of those temporary kings, those mortal gods, who purchase a short lease of power and glory at the price of their lives. That he is the temporary substitute of the Grand Lama is certain; that he is, or was once, liable to act as scapegoat for the people is made nearly certain by his offer to change places with the real scapegoat—the King of the Years—if the arbitrament of the dice should go against him. It is true that the conditions under which the question is now put to the hazard have reduced the offer to an idle form. But such forms are no mere mushroom growths, springing up of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page222">[pg 222]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg222" name="Pg222"/> themselves in a night. If they are now lifeless formalities, empty husks devoid of significance, we may be sure that they once had a life and a meaning; if at the present day they are blind alleys leading nowhere, we may be certain that in former days they were paths that led somewhere, if only to death. That death was the goal to which of old the Tibetan scapegoat passed after his brief period of licence in the market-place, is a conjecture that has much to commend it. Analogy suggests it; the blank shots fired after him, the statement that the ceremony often proves fatal, the belief that his death is a happy omen, all confirm it. We need not wonder then that the Jalno, after paying so dear to act as deputy-deity for a few weeks, should have preferred to die by deputy rather than in his own person when his time was up. The painful but necessary duty was accordingly laid on some poor devil, some social outcast, some wretch with whom the world had gone hard, who readily agreed to throw away his life at the end of a few days if only he might have his fling in the meantime. For observe that while the time allowed to the original deputy—the Jalno—was measured by weeks, the time allowed to the deputy's deputy was cut down to days, ten days according to one authority, seven days according to another. So short a rope was doubtless thought a long enough tether for so black or sickly a sheep; so few sands in the hour-glass, slipping so fast away, sufficed for one who had wasted so many precious years. Hence in the jack-pudding who now masquerades with motley countenance in the market-place of Lhasa, sweeping up misfortune with a black yak's tail, we may fairly see the substitute of a substitute, the vicar of a vicar, the proxy on whose back the heavy burden was laid when it had been lifted from nobler shoulders. But the clue, if we have followed it aright, does not stop at the Jalno; it leads straight back to the pope of Lhasa himself, the Grand Lama, of whom the Jalno is merely the temporary vicar. The analogy of many customs in many lands points to the conclusion that, if this human divinity stoops to resign his ghostly power for a time into the hands of a substitute, it is, or rather was once, for no other reason than that the substitute might die in his stead. Thus through the mist of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page223">[pg 223]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg223" name="Pg223"/> ages unillumined by the lamp of history, the tragic figure of the pope of Buddhism—God's vicar on earth for Asia—looms dim and sad as the man-god who bore his people's sorrows, the Good Shepherd who laid down his life for the sheep.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page224">[pg 224]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg224" name="Pg224"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
