<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>III: Sympathetic Magic</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-1" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-1-3" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Sympathetic Magic</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<section id="chapter-1-3-1">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">The Principles of Magic</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>If we analyse the principles of thought on which magic is based, they will probably be found to resolve themselves into two: first, that like produces like, or that an effect resembles its cause; and, second, that things which have once been in contact with each other continue to act on each other at a distance after the physical contact has been severed. The former principle may be called the Law of Similarity, the latter the Law of Contact or Contagion. From the first of these principles, namely the Law of Similarity, the magician infers that he can produce any effect he desires merely by imitating it: from the second he infers that whatever he does to a material object will affect equally the person with whom the object was once in contact, whether it formed part of his body or not. Charms based on the Law of Similarity may be called Homoeopathic or Imitative Magic.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-189" id="noteref-1-1-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a> Charms based on the Law of Contact or Contagion may be called Contagious Magic. To denote the first of these branches of magic the term Homoeopathic is perhaps preferable, for the alternative term Imitative or Mimetic suggests, if it does not imply, a conscious agent who imitates, thereby limiting the scope of magic too narrowly. For the same principles which the magician applies in the practice of his art are implicitly believed by him to regulate the operations of inanimate nature; in other words, he tacitly assumes that the Laws of Similarity and Contact are of universal application and are not limited to human actions. In short, magic is a spurious system of natural law as well as a fallacious guide of conduct; it is a false science as well as an abortive art. Regarded as a system of natural law, that is, as a statement of the rules which determine the sequence of events throughout the world, it may be called Theoretical Magic: regarded as a set of precepts which human beings observe in order to compass their ends, it may be called Practical Magic. At the same time it is to be borne in mind that the primitive magician knows magic only on its practical side; he never analyses the mental processes on which his practice is based, never reflects on the abstract principles involved in his actions. With him, as with the vast majority of men, logic is implicit, not explicit: he reasons just as he digests his food in complete ignorance of the intellectual and physiological processes which are essential to the one operation and to the other. In short, to him magic is always an art, never a science; the very idea of science is lacking in his undeveloped mind. It is for the philosophic student to trace the train of thought which underlies the magician’s practice; to draw out the few simple threads of which the tangled skein is composed; to disengage the abstract principles from their concrete applications; in short, to discern the spurious science behind the bastard art.</p>
					<p>If my analysis of the magician’s logic is correct, its two great principles turn out to be merely two different misapplications of the association of ideas.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-190" id="noteref-1-1-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a> Homoeopathic magic is founded on the association of ideas by similarity: contagious magic is founded on the association of ideas by contiguity. Homoeopathic magic commits the mistake of assuming that things which resemble each other are the same: contagious magic commits the mistake of assuming that things which have once been in contact with each other are always in contact. But in practice the two branches are often combined; or, to be more exact, while homoeopathic or imitative magic may be practised by itself, contagious magic will generally be found to involve an application of the homoeopathic or imitative principle. Thus generally stated the two things may be a little difficult to grasp, but they will readily become intelligible when they are illustrated by particular examples. Both trains of thought are in fact extremely simple and elementary. It could hardly be otherwise, since they are familiar in the concrete, though certainly not in the abstract, to the crude intelligence not only of the savage, but of ignorant and dull-witted people everywhere. Both branches of magic, the homoeopathic and the contagious, may conveniently be comprehended under the general name of Sympathetic Magic, since both assume that things act on each other at a distance through a secret sympathy, the impulse being transmitted from one to the other by means of what we may conceive as a kind of invisible ether, not unlike that which is postulated by modern science for a precisely similar purpose, namely, to explain how things can physically affect each other through a space which appears to be empty.</p>
					<p>It may be convenient to tabulate as follows the branches of magic according to the laws of thought which underlie them:⁠—</p>
					<ul id="ulp54">
						<li>Sympathetic Magic (<i>Law of Sympathy</i>) <ul><li>Homoeopathic Magic (<i>Law of Similarity</i>)</li> <li>Contagious Magic​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-191" id="noteref-1-1-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a> (<i>Law of Contact</i>)</li></ul></li>
					</ul>
					<p>I will now illustrate these two great branches of sympathetic magic by examples, beginning with homoeopathic magic.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-1-3-2">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">Homeopathic or Imitative Magic</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>Perhaps the most familiar application of the principle that like produces like is the attempt which has been made by many peoples in many ages to injure or destroy an enemy by injuring or destroying an image of him, in the belief that, just as the image suffers, so does the man, and that when it perishes he must die. A few instances out of many may be given to prove at once the wide diffusion of the practice over the world and its remarkable persistence through the ages. For thousands of years ago it was known to the sorcerers of ancient India, Babylon, and Egypt, as well as of Greece and Rome,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-192" id="noteref-1-1-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a> and at this day it is still resorted to by cunning and malignant savages in Australia, Africa, and Scotland. Thus the North American Indians, we are told, believe that by drawing the figure of a person in sand, ashes, or clay, or by considering any object as his body, and then pricking it with a sharp stick or doing it any other injury, they inflict a corresponding injury on the person represented.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-193" id="noteref-1-1-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a> For example, when an Ojebway Indian desires to work evil on anyone, he makes a little wooden image of his enemy and runs a needle into its head or heart, or he shoots an arrow into it, believing that wherever the needle pierces or the arrow strikes the image, his foe will the same instant be seized with a sharp pain in the corresponding part of his body; but if he intends to kill the person outright, he burns or buries the puppet, uttering certain magic words as he does so.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-194" id="noteref-1-1-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a> So when a Cora Indian of Mexico wishes to kill a man, he makes a figure of him out of burnt clay, strips of cloth, and so forth, and then, muttering incantations, runs thorns through the head or stomach of the figure to make his victim suffer correspondingly. Sometimes the Cora Indian makes a more beneficent use of this sort of homoeopathic magic. When he wishes to multiply his flocks or herds, he models a figure of the animal he wants in wax or clay, or carves it from tuff, and deposits it in a cave of the mountains; for these Indians believe that the mountains are masters of all riches, including cattle and sheep. For every cow, deer, dog, or hen he wants, the Indian has to sacrifice a corresponding image of the creature.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-195" id="noteref-1-1-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a> This may help us to understand the meaning of the figures of cattle, deer, horses, and pigs which were dedicated to Diana at Nemi.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-196" id="noteref-1-1-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> They may have been the offerings of farmers or huntsmen who hoped thereby to multiply the cattle or the game. Similarly when the Todas of Southern India desire to obtain more buffaloes, they offer silver images of these animals in the temples.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-197" id="noteref-1-1-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a> The Peruvian Indians moulded images of fat mixed with grain to imitate the persons whom they disliked or feared, and then burned the effigy on the road where the intended victim was to pass. This they called burning his soul. But they drew a delicate distinction between the kinds of materials to be used in the manufacture of these images, according as the victim was an Indian or a Viracocha, that is, a Spaniard. To kill an Indian they employed maize and the fat of a llama, to kill a Spaniard they used wheat and the fat of a pig, because Viracochas did not eat llamas and preferred wheat to maize.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-198" id="noteref-1-1-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a></p>
					<p>A Malay charm of the same sort is as follows. Take parings of nails, hair, eyebrows, spittle, and so forth of your intended victim, enough to represent every part of his person, and then make them up into his likeness with wax from a deserted bees’ comb. Scorch the figure slowly by holding it over a lamp every night for seven nights, and say:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“It is not wax that I am scorching,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It is the liver, hearty and spleen of So-and-so that I scorch.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">After the seventh time burn the figure, and your victim will die. This charm obviously combines the principles of homoeopathic and contagious magic; since the image which is made in the likeness of an enemy contains things which once were in contact with him, namely, his nails, hair, and spittle. Another form of the Malay charm, which resembles the Ojebway practice still more closely, is to make a corpse of wax from an empty bees’ comb and of the length of a footstep; then pierce the eye of the image, and your enemy is blind; pierce the stomach, and he is sick; pierce the head, and his head aches; pierce the breast, and his breast will suffer. If you would kill him outright, transfix the image from the head downwards; enshroud it as you would a corpse; pray over it as if you were praying over the dead; then bury it in the middle of a path where your victim will be sure to step over it. In order that his blood may not be on your head, you should say:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“It is not I who am burying him,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It is Gabriel who is burying him.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">Thus the guilt of the murder will be laid on the shoulders of the archangel Gabriel, who is a great deal better able to bear it than you are.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-199" id="noteref-1-1-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a> In eastern Java an enemy may be killed by means of a likeness of him drawn on a piece of paper, which is then incensed or buried in the ground.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-200" id="noteref-1-1-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> Among the Minangkabauers of Sumatra a man who is tormented by the passion of hate or of unrequited love will call in the help of a wizard in order to cause the object of his hate or love to suffer from a dangerous ulcer known as a <i>tinggam</i>. After giving the wizard the necessary instructions as to the name, bodily form, dwelling, and family of the person in question, he makes a puppet which is supposed to resemble his intended victim; and repairs with it to a wood, where he hangs the image on a tree that stands quite by itself. Muttering a spell, he then drives an instrument through the navel of the puppet into the tree, till the sap of the tree oozes through the hole thus made. The instrument which inflicts the wound bears the same name (<i>tinggam</i>) as the ulcer which is to be raised on the body of the victim, and the oozing sap is believed to be his or her life-spirit. Soon afterwards the person against whom the charm is directed begins to suffer from an ulcer, which grows worse and worse till he dies, unless a friend can procure a piece of the wood of the tree to which the image is attached.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-201" id="noteref-1-1-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a></p>
					<p>The sorcerers of Mabuiag or Jervis Island, in Torres Straits, kept an assortment of effigies in stock ready to be operated on at the requirement of a customer. Some of the figures were of stone; these were employed when short work was to be made of a man or woman. Others were wooden; these gave the unhappy victim a little more rope, only, however, to terminate his prolonged sufferings by a painful death. The mode of operation in the latter case was to put poison, by means of a magical implement, into a wooden image, to which the name of the intended victim had been given. Next day the person aimed at would feel chilly, then waste away and die, unless the same wizard who had wrought the charm would consent to undo it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-202" id="noteref-1-1-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a> If the sorcerer pulled off an arm or leg of the image, the human victim felt pain in the corresponding limb of his body; but if the sorcerer restored the severed arm or leg to the figure, the man recovered. Another mode of compassing a man’s death in Torres Straits was to prick a wax effigy of him or her with the spine of a stingray; so when the man whose name had been given to the waxen image next went afishing on the reef a stingray would sting him in the exact part of his body where the waxen image had been pierced. Or the sorcerer might hang the effigy on the bough of a tree, and as it swayed to and fro in the wind the person represented by it would fall sick. However, he would get well again if a friend of his could induce the magician to steady the figure by sticking it firmly in the sandy bottom of the sea.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-203" id="noteref-1-1-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a> When the Lerons of Borneo wish to be revenged on an enemy, they make a wooden image of him and leave it in the jungle. As it decays, he dies.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-204" id="noteref-1-1-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a> More elaborate is the proceeding adopted by the Kenyahs of Borneo in similar circumstances. The operator retires with the image to a quiet spot on the river bank, and when a hawk appears in a certain part of the sky, he kills a fowl, smears its blood on the image, and puts a bit of fat in the mouth of the figure, saying, “Put fat in his mouth.” By that he means, “May his head be cut off, hung up in an enemy’s house, and fed with fat in the usual way.” Then he strikes at the breast of the image with a small wooden spear, throws it into a pool of water reddened with red earth, and afterwards takes it out and buries it in the ground.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-205" id="noteref-1-1-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a></p>
					<p>If an Aino of Japan desires to compass the destruction of an enemy, he will make a likeness of him out of mugwort or the guelder-rose and bury it in a hole upside down or under the trunk of a rotten tree, with a prayer to a demon to carry off the man’s soul or to make his body rot away with the tree. Sometimes an Aino woman will attempt to get rid of her husband in this fashion by wrapping up his headdress in the shape of a corpse and burying it deep in the ground, while she breathes a prayer that her husband may rot and die with the headdress.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-206" id="noteref-1-1-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a> The Japanese themselves are familiar with similar modes of enchantment. In one of their ancient books we read of a rebellious minister who made figures of the heir to the throne with intent, no doubt, to do him grievous bodily harm thereby; and sometimes a woman who has been deserted by her lover will make a straw effigy of the faithless gallant and nail it to a sacred tree, adjuring the gods to spare the tree and to visit the sacrilege on the traitor. At a shrine of Kompira there stood a pine-tree studded with nails which had been thus driven in for the purpose of doing people to death.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-207" id="noteref-1-1-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a> The Chinese also are perfectly aware that you can harm a man by maltreating or cursing an image of him, especially if you have taken care to write on it his name and horoscope. This mode of venting spite on an enemy is said to be commonly practised in China. In Amoy such images, roughly made of bamboo splinters and paper, are called “substitutes of persons” and may be bought very cheap for a cash or so apiece at any shop which sells paper articles for the use of the dead or the gods; for the frugal Chinese are in the habit of palming off paper imitations of all kinds of valuables on the simple-minded ghosts and gods, who take them in all good faith for the genuine articles. As usual, the victim suffers a hurt corresponding to the hurt done to his image. Thus if you run a nail or a needle into the eyes of the puppet, your man will go more or less blind; if you stick a pin in its stomach, he will be doubled up with colic; a stab in the heart of the effigy may kill him outright; and in general the more you prick it and the louder you speak the spell, the more certain is the effect. To make assurance doubly sure it is desirable to impregnate the effigy, so to say, with the personal influence of the man by passing it clandestinely beforehand over him or hiding it, unbeknown to him, in his clothes or under his bed. If you do that, he is quite sure to die sooner or later.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-208" id="noteref-1-1-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a> Naturally these nefarious practices are no new thing in the Chinese empire. There is a passage in the Chinese <i>Book of Rewards and Penalties</i> which illustrates their prevalence in days gone by. There, under the rubric “To hide an effigy of a man for the purpose of giving him the nightmare,” we read as follows: “This means hiding the carved wooden effigy of a man somewhere with intent to give him the nightmare. Kong-sun-tcho having died suddenly some time after he had succeeded to the post of treasurer, he appeared in a dream to the governor of his district and said unto him: ‘I have been the victim of an odious crime, and I am come, my lord, to pray you to avenge me. My time to die had not yet come; but my servants gave me the nightmare, and I was choked in my sleep. If you will send secretly some dauntless soldiers, not one of the varlets will escape you. Under the seventh tile of the roof of my house will be found my image carved of wood. Fetch it and punish the criminals.’ Next day the governor of the district had all the servants arrested, and sure enough, after some search, they found under the aforesaid tile the figure of a man in wood, a foot high, and bristling all over with nails. Bit by bit the wood changed into flesh and uttered inarticulate cries when it was struck. The governor of the district immediately reported to the prefect of the department, who condemned several of the servants to suffer the extreme rigour of the law.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-209" id="noteref-1-1-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a></p>
					<p>When some of the aborigines of Victoria desired to destroy an enemy, they would occasionally retire to a lonely spot, and drawing on the ground a rude likeness of the victim would sit round it and devote him to destruction with cabalistic ceremonies. So dreaded was this incantation that men and women, who learned that it had been directed against them, have been known to pine away and die of fright.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-210" id="noteref-1-1-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a> On the Bloomfield River in Queensland the natives think they can doom a man by making a rough wooden effigy of him and burying it in the ground, or by painting his likeness on a bull-roarer; and they believe that persons whose portraits are carved on a tree at Cape Bedford will waste away.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-211" id="noteref-1-1-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a> When the wife of a Central Australian native has eloped from him and he cannot recover her, the disconsolate husband repairs with some sympathising friends to a secluded spot, where a man skilled in magic draws on the ground a rough figure supposed to represent the woman lying on her back. Beside the figure is laid a piece of green bark, which stands for her spirit or soul, and at it the men throw miniature spears which have been made for the purpose and charmed by singing over them. This barken effigy of the woman’s spirit, with the little spears sticking in it, is then thrown as far as possible in the direction which she is supposed to have taken. During the whole of the operation the men chant in a low voice, the burden of their song being an invitation to the magic influence to go out and enter her body and dry up all her fat. Sooner or later⁠—often a good deal later⁠—her fat does dry up, she dies, and her spirit is seen in the sky in the form of a shooting star.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-212" id="noteref-1-1-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a></p>
					<p>In Burma a rejected lover sometimes resorts to a sorcerer and engages him to make a small image of the scornful fair one, containing a piece of her clothes, or of something which she has been in the habit of wearing. Certain charms or medicines also enter into the composition of the doll, which is then hung up or thrown into the water. As a consequence the girl is supposed to go mad.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-213" id="noteref-1-1-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> In this last example, as in the first of the Malay charms noticed above, homoeopathic or imitative magic is blent with contagious magic in the strict sense of the word, since the likeness of the victim contains something which has been in contact with her person. A Matabele who wishes to avenge himself on an enemy makes a clay figure of him and pierces it with a needle; next time the man thus represented happens to engage in a fight he will be speared, just as his effigy was stabbed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-214" id="noteref-1-1-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a> The Ovambo of Southwestern Africa believe that some people have the power of bewitching an absent person by gazing into a vessel full of water till his image appears to them in the water; then they spit at the image and curse the man, and that seals his fate.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-215" id="noteref-1-1-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a></p>
					<p>The ancient books of the Hindus testify to the use of similar enchantments among their remote ancestors. To destroy his foe a man would fashion a figure of him in clay and transfix it with an arrow which had been barbed with a thorn and winged with an owl’s feathers. Or he would mould the figure of wax and melt it in a fire. Sometimes effigies of the soldiers, horses, elephants, and chariots of a hostile army were modelled in dough, and then pulled in pieces.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-216" id="noteref-1-1-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a> Again, to destroy an enemy the magician might kill a redheaded lizard with the words, “I am killing So-and-so,” smear it with blood, wrap it in a black cloth, and having pronounced an incantation burn it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-217" id="noteref-1-1-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> Another way was to grind up mustard into meal, with which a figure was made of the person who was to be overcome or destroyed. Then having muttered certain spells to give efficacy to the rite, the enchanter chopped up the image, anointed it with melted butter, curds, or some such thing, and finally burnt it in a sacred pot.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-218" id="noteref-1-1-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> In the so-called “sanguinary chapter” of the <i>Calica Puran</i> there occurs the following passage: “On the autumnal <i>Maha-Navami</i>, or when the month is in the lunar mansion <i>Scanda</i>, or <i>Bishácá</i>, let a figure be made, either of barley-meal or earth, representing the person with whom the sacrificer is at variance, and the head of the figure be struck off; after the usual texts have been used, the following text is to be used in invoking an axe on the occasion: ‘Effuse, effuse blood; be terrific, be terrific; seize, destroy, for the love of <i>Ambica</i>, the head of this enemy.’ ”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-219" id="noteref-1-1-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a></p>
					<p>In modern India the practices described in these old books are still carried on with mere variations of detail. The magician compounds the fatal image of earth taken from sixty-four filthy places, and mixed up with clippings of hair, parings of nails, bits of leather, and so on. Upon the breast of the image he writes the name of his enemy; then he pierces it through and through with an awl, or maims it in various ways, hoping thus to maim or kill the object of his vengeance.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-220" id="noteref-1-1-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> Among the Nambutiris of Malabar a figure representing the enemy to be destroyed is drawn on a small sheet of metal, gold by preference, on which some mystic diagrams are also inscribed. The sorcerer then declares that the bodily injury or death of the person shall take place at a certain time. After that he wraps up the little sheet in another sheet or leaf of metal (gold if possible), and buries it in a place where the victim is expected to pass. Sometimes instead of a small sheet of metal he buries a live frog or lizard enclosed in a coconut shell, after sticking nails into its eyes and stomach. At the same moment that the animal dies the person expires also.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-221" id="noteref-1-1-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a> Among the Mohammedans of Northern India the proceeding is as follows. A doll is made of earth taken from a grave or from a place where bodies are cremated, and some sentences of the Coran are read backwards over twenty-one small wooden pegs. These pegs the operator next strikes into various parts of the body of the image, which is afterwards shrouded like a corpse, carried to a graveyard, and buried in the name of the enemy whom it is intended to injure. The man, it is believed, will die without fail after the ceremony.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-222" id="noteref-1-1-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> A slightly different form of the charm is observed by the Bâm-Margi, a very degraded sect of Hindus in the Northwest Provinces. To kill an enemy they make an image of flour or earth, and stick razors into the breast, navel, and throat, while pegs are thrust into the eyes, hands, and feet. As if this were not enough, they next construct an image of Bhairava or Durga holding a three-pronged fork in her hand; this they place so close to the effigy of the person to whom mischief is meant that the fork penetrates its breast.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-223" id="noteref-1-1-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a> To injure a person a Singhalese sorcerer will procure a lock of his intended victim’s hair, a paring of his nails, or a thread of his garment. Then he fashions an image of him and thrusts nails made of five metals into the joints. All these he buries where the unfortunate man is likely to pass. No sooner has he done so than the victim falls ill with swelling or stiffness of joints, or burning sensations in the body, or disfigurements of the mouth, legs, and arms.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-224" id="noteref-1-1-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a></p>
					<p>Similar enchantments are wrought by the Muslim peoples of North Africa. Thus an Arabic treatise on magic directs that if you wish to deprive a man of the use of his limbs you should make a waxen image of him, and engrave his name and his mother’s name on it with a knife of which the handle must be made of the same wax; then smite the limb of the image which answers to the particular limb of the man which you desire to disable; at the same moment the limb of flesh and blood will be paralysed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-225" id="noteref-1-1-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> The following is another extract from the same treatise: “To injure the eyes of an enemy, take a taper and fashion it into the likeness of him whom you would harm. Write on it the seven signs, along with the name of your enemy and the name of his mother and gouge out the two eyes of the figure with two points. Then put it in a pot with quicklime on which you must throw a little <i>chârib el h’amâm</i>, and bury the whole near the fire. The fire will make your victim to shriek and will hurt his eyes so that he will see nothing, and that the pain will cause him to utter cries of distress. But do not prolong the operation more than seven days, for he would die and you would have to answer for it at the day of the last judgment. If you wish to heal him, withdraw the figure and throw it into water. He will recover, with God’s leave.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-226" id="noteref-1-1-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a></p>
					<p>Nowhere, perhaps, were the magic arts more carefully cultivated, nowhere did they enjoy greater esteem or exercise a deeper influence on the national life than in the land of the Pharaohs. Little wonder, therefore, that the practice of enchantment by means of images was familiar to the wizards of Egypt. A drop of a man’s blood, some clippings of his hair or parings of his nails, a rag of the garment which he had worn, sufficed to give a sorcerer complete power over him. These relics of his person the magician kneaded into a lump of wax, which he moulded into the likeness and dressed after the fashion of his intended victim, who was then at the mercy of his tormentor. If the image was exposed to the fire, the person whom it represented straightway fell into a burning fever; if it were stabbed with a knife, he felt the pain of the wound.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-227" id="noteref-1-1-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> Thus, for instance, a certain superintendent of the king’s cattle was once prosecuted in an Egyptian court of law for having made figures of men and women in wax, thereby causing paralysis of their limbs and other grievous bodily harm. He had somehow obtained a book of magic which contained the spells and directions how to act in reciting them. Armed with this powerful instrument the rogue had shut himself up in a secret chamber, and there proceeded to cast spells over the people of his town.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-228" id="noteref-1-1-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> In ancient Babylonia also it was a common practice to make an image of clay, pitch, honey, fat, or other soft material in the likeness of an enemy, and to injure or kill him by burning, burying, or otherwise ill-treating it. Thus in a hymn to the fire-god Nusku we read:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Those who have made images of me, reproducing my features,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who have taken away my breath, torn my hairs,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who have rent my clothes, have hindered my feet from treading the dust,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>May the fire-god, the strong one, break their charm.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-229" id="noteref-1-1-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>But both in Babylon and in Egypt this ancient tool of superstition, so baneful in the hands of the mischievous and malignant, was also pressed into the service of religion and turned to glorious account for the confusion and overthrow of demons. In a Babylonian incantation we meet with a long list of evil spirits whose effigies were burnt by the magician in the hope that, as their images melted in the fire, so the fiends themselves might melt away and disappear.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-230" id="noteref-1-1-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a> Every night when the sun-god Ra sank down to his home in the glowing west he was assailed by hosts of demons under the leadership of the arch-fiend Apepi. All night long he fought them, and sometimes by day the powers of darkness sent up clouds even into the blue Egyptian sky to obscure his light and weaken his power. To aid the sun-god in this daily struggle, a ceremony was daily performed in his temple at Thebes. A figure of his foe Apepi, represented as a crocodile with a hideous face or a serpent with many coils, was made of wax, and on it the demon’s name was written in green ink. Wrapt in a papyrus case, on which another likeness of Apepi had been drawn in green ink, the figure was then tied up with black hair, spat upon, hacked with a stone knife, and cast on the ground. There the priest trod on it with his left foot again and again, and then burned it in a fire made of a certain plant or grass. When Apepi himself had thus been effectually disposed of, waxen effigies of each of his principal demons, and of their fathers, mothers, and children, were made and burnt in the same way. The service, accompanied by the recitation of certain prescribed spells, was repeated not merely morning, noon, and night, but whenever a storm was raging, or heavy rain had set in, or black clouds were stealing across the sky to hide the sun’s bright disc. The fiends of darkness, clouds, and rain felt the injuries inflicted on their images as if they had been done to themselves; they passed away, at least for a time, and the beneficent sun-god shone out triumphant once more.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-231" id="noteref-1-1-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a></p>
					<p>From the azure sky, the stately fanes, and the solemn ritual of ancient Egypt we have to travel far in space and time to the misty mountains and the humble cottages of the Scottish Highlands of today; but at our journey’s end we shall find our ignorant countrymen seeking to attain the same end by the same means and, unhappily, with the same malignity as the Egyptian of old. To kill a person whom he hates, a modern Highlander will still make a rude clay image of him, called a <i>corp chre</i> or <i>corp chreadh</i> (“clay body”), stick it full of pins, nails, and broken bits of glass, and then place it in a running stream with its head to the current. As every pin is thrust into the figure an incantation is uttered, and the person represented feels a pain in the corresponding part of his body. If the intention is to make him die a lingering death, the operator is careful to stick no pins into the region of the heart, whereas he thrusts them into that region deliberately if he desires to rid himself of his enemy at once. And as the clay puppet crumbles away in the running water, so the victim’s body is believed to waste away and turn to clay. In Islay the spell spoken over the <i>corp chre</i>, when it is ready to receive the pins, is as follows: “From behind you are like a ram with an old fleece.” And as the pins are being thrust in, a long incantation is pronounced, beginning “As you waste away, may she waste away; as this wounds you, may it wound her.” Sometimes, we are told, the effigy is set before a blazing fire on a door which has been taken off its hinges; there it is toasted and turned to make the human victim writhe in agony. The <i>corp chre</i> is reported to have been employed of late years in the counties of Inverness, Ross, and Sutherland. A specimen from Inverness-shire may be seen in the Pitt-Rivers Museum at Oxford.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-232" id="noteref-1-1-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a> It is remarkable, however, that in the Highlands this form of magic has no power over a man who has lost any of his members. For example, though Ross-shire witches made a clay figure of “Donald of the Ear,” they could not destroy him, because he had lost an ear in battle.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-233" id="noteref-1-1-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a> A similar form of witchcraft, known as “burying the sheaf,” seems still to linger in Ireland among the dwellers in the Bog of Ardee. The person who works the charm goes first to a chapel and says certain prayers with his back to the altar; then he takes a sheaf of wheat, which he fastens into the likeness of a human body, sticking pins in the joints of the stems and, according to one account, shaping a heart of plaited straw. This sheaf he buries in the devil’s name near the house of his enemy, who will, it is supposed, gradually pine away as the sheaf decays, dying when it finally decomposes. If the enchanter desires his foe to perish speedily, he buries the sheaf in wet ground, where it will soon moulder away; but if on the other hand his wish is that his victim should linger in pain, he chooses a dry spot, where decomposition will be slow.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-234" id="noteref-1-1-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a> However, in Scotland, as in Babylon and Egypt, the destruction of an image has also been employed for the discomfiture of fiends. When Shetland fishermen wish to disenchant their boat, they row it out to sea before sunrise, and as the day is dawning they burn a waxen figure in the boat, while the skipper exclaims, “Go hence, Satan.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-235" id="noteref-1-1-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a></p>
					<p>If homoeopathic or imitative magic, working by means of images, has commonly been practised for the spiteful purpose of putting obnoxious people out of the world, it has also, though far more rarely, been employed with the benevolent intention of helping others into it. In other words, it has been used to facilitate childbirth and to procure offspring for barren women. Thus among the Eskimo of Bering Strait a barren woman desirous of having a son will consult a shaman, who commonly makes, or causes her husband to make, a small doll-like image over which he performs certain secret rites, and the woman is directed to sleep with it under her pillow.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-236" id="noteref-1-1-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> Amongst the many ceremonies which a Thompson Indian girl of British Columbia had formerly to perform at puberty was the following. She had to run four times in the morning, carrying two small stones which had been obtained from underneath the water. These were put in her bosom; and as she ran, they slipped down between her body and her clothes and fell to the ground. While she ran, she prayed to the Dawn that when she should be with child she might be delivered as easily as she had been delivered of these stones.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-237" id="noteref-1-1-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a> Similarly among the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands a pregnant woman would let round stones, eels, chips, or other small objects slip down over her abdomen for the sake of facilitating her delivery.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-238" id="noteref-1-1-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a> Among the Nishinam Indians of California, when a woman is childless, her female friends sometimes make out of grass a rude image of a baby and tie it in a small basket after the Indian fashion. Some day, when the woman is from home, they lay this grass baby in her hut. On finding it she holds it to her breast, pretends to nurse it, and sings it lullabies. This is done as a charm to make her conceive.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-239" id="noteref-1-1-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a> The Huichol Indians of Mexico believe in a certain Mother who is the goddess of conception and childbirth, and lives in a cave near Santa Catarina. A woman desirous of offspring deposits in this cave a doll made of cotton cloth to represent the baby on which her heart is set. After a while she goes back to the cave, puts the doll under her girdle, and soon afterwards is supposed to be pregnant.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-240" id="noteref-1-1-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a> With a like intent Indian women in Peru used to wrap up stones like babies and leave them at the foot of a large stone, which they revered for this purpose.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-241" id="noteref-1-1-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a> Among the Makatisses, a Caffre tribe of South Africa, a traveller observed a woman carefully tending a doll made out of a gourd, adorned with necklaces of glass beads, and heavily weighted with iron ore. On enquiry he learned that she had been directed by the medicine-man to do this as a means of obtaining a child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-242" id="noteref-1-1-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a> Among the Basutos childless wives make rude effigies of clay, and give them the name of some tutelar deity. They treat these dolls as if they were real children, and beseech the divinity to whom they have dedicated them to grant them the power of conception.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-243" id="noteref-1-1-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a> In Anno, a district of West Africa, women may often be seen carrying wooden dolls strapped, like babies, on their backs as a cure for sterility.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-244" id="noteref-1-1-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a> In Japan, when a marriage is unfruitful, the old women of the neighbourhood come to the house and go through a pretence of delivering the wife of a child. The infant is represented by a doll.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-245" id="noteref-1-1-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> The Maoris had a household god whose image was in the form of an infant. The image was very carefully made, generally life-size, and adorned with the family jewels. Barren women nursed it and addressed it in the most endearing terms in order to become mothers.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-246" id="noteref-1-1-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a></p>
					<p>Among the Battas of Sumatra a barren woman, who would become a mother, will make a wooden image of a child and hold it in her lap, believing that this will lead to the fulfilment of her wish.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-247" id="noteref-1-1-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> In the Babar Archipelago, when a woman desires to have a child, she invites a man who is himself the father of a large family to pray on her behalf to Upulero, the spirit of the sun. A doll is made of red cotton, which the woman clasps in her arms as if she would suckle it. Then the father of many children takes a fowl and holds it by the legs to the woman’s head, saying, “O Upulero, make use of the fowl; let fall, let descend a child, I beseech you, I entreat you, let a child fall and descend into my hands and on my lap.” Then he asks the woman, “Has the child come?” and she answers, “Yes, it is sucking already.” After that the man holds the fowl on the husband’s head, and mumbles some form of words. Lastly, the bird is killed and laid, together with some betel, on the domestic place of sacrifice. When the ceremony is over, word goes about in the village that the woman has been brought to bed, and her friends come and congratulate her.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-248" id="noteref-1-1-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a> Here the pretence that a child has been born is a purely magical rite designed to secure, by means of imitation or mimicry, that a child really shall be born; but an attempt is made to add to the efficacy of the rite by means of prayer and sacrifice. To put it otherwise, magic is here blent with and reinforced by religion. In Saibai, one of the islands in Torres Straits, a similar custom of purely magical character is observed, without any religious alloy. Here, when a woman is pregnant, all the other women assemble. The husband’s sister makes an image of a male child and places it before the pregnant woman; afterwards the image is nursed until the birth of the child in order to ensure that the baby shall be a boy. To secure male offspring a woman will also press to her abdomen a fruit resembling the male organ of generation, which she then passes to another woman who has borne none but boys. This, it is clear, is imitative magic in a slightly different form.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-249" id="noteref-1-1-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a> In the seventh month of a woman’s pregnancy common people in Java observe a ceremony which is plainly designed to facilitate the real birth by mimicking it. Husband and wife repair to a well or to the bank of a neighbouring river. The upper part of the woman’s body is bare, but young banana leaves are fastened under her arms, a small opening, or rather fold, being left in the leaves in front. Through this opening or fold in the leaves on his wife’s body the husband lets fall from above a weaver’s shuttle. An old woman receives the shuttle as it falls, takes it up in her arms and dandles it as if it were a baby, saying, “Oh, what a dear little child! Oh, what a beautiful little child!” Then the husband lets an egg slip through the fold, and when it lies on the ground as an emblem of the afterbirth, he takes his sword and cuts through the banana leaf at the place of the fold, obviously as if he were severing the navel-string.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-250" id="noteref-1-1-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a> Persons of high rank in Java observe the ceremony after a fashion in which the real meaning of the rite is somewhat obscured. The pregnant woman is clothed in a long robe, which her husband, kneeling before her, severs with a stroke of his sword from bottom to top. Then he throws his sword on the ground and runs away as fast as he can.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-251" id="noteref-1-1-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a> According to another account, the woman is wrapt round with white thread; her husband cuts it with his sword, throws away an oblong white gourd, dashes a fowl’s egg to the ground, rolls along a young coconut on which the figures of a man and woman have been painted, and so departs in haste.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-252" id="noteref-1-1-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> Among some of the Dyaks of Borneo, when a woman is in hard labour, a wizard is called in, who essays to facilitate the delivery in a rational manner by manipulating the body of the sufferer. Meantime another wizard outside the room exerts himself to attain the same end by means which we should regard as wholly irrational. He, in fact, pretends to be the expectant mother; a large stone attached to his stomach by a cloth wrapt round his body represents the child in the womb, and, following the directions shouted to him by his colleague on the real scene of operations, he moves this make-believe baby about on his body in exact imitation of the movements of the real baby till the infant is born.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-253" id="noteref-1-1-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a></p>
					<p>The same principle of make-believe, so dear to children, has led other peoples to employ a simulation of birth as a form of adoption, and even as a mode of restoring a supposed dead person to life. If you pretend to give birth to a boy, or even to a great bearded man who has not a drop of your blood in his veins, then, in the eyes of primitive law and philosophy, that boy or man is really your son to all intents and purposes. Thus Diodorus tells us that when Zeus persuaded his jealous wife Hera to adopt Hercules, the goddess got into bed, and clasping the burly hero to her bosom, pushed him through her robes and let him fall to the ground in imitation of a real birth; and the historian adds that in his own day the same mode of adopting children was practised by the barbarians.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-254" id="noteref-1-1-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> At the present time it is said to be still in use in Bulgaria and among the Bosnian Turks. A woman will take a boy whom she intends to adopt and push or pull him through her clothes; ever afterwards he is regarded as her very son, and inherits the whole property of his adoptive parents.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-255" id="noteref-1-1-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> Among the Berawans of Sarawak, when a woman desires to adopt a grown-up man or woman, a great many people assemble and have a feast. The adopting mother, seated in public on a raised and covered seat, allows the adopted person to crawl from behind between her legs. As soon as he appears in front he is stroked with the sweet-scented blossoms of the areca palm, and tied to the woman. Then the adopting mother and the adopted son or daughter, thus bound together, waddle to the end of the house and back again in front of all the spectators. The tie established between the two by this graphic imitation of childbirth is very strict; an offence committed against an adopted child is reckoned more heinous than one committed against a real child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-256" id="noteref-1-1-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> In Central Africa “the Bahima practise adoption; the male relatives always take charge of a brother’s children. When a man dies his brother takes any children of the deceased and places them one by one in his wife’s lap. Then he binds round her waist the thong used for tying the legs of restive cows during milking, just as is done after childbirth. The children are then brought up with his own family.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-257" id="noteref-1-1-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a> In ancient Greece any man who had been supposed erroneously to be dead, and for whom in his absence funeral rites had been performed, was treated as dead to society till he had gone through the form of being born again. He was passed through a woman’s lap, then washed, dressed in swaddling-clothes, and put out to nurse. Not until this ceremony had been punctually performed might he mix freely with living folk.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-258" id="noteref-1-1-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> In ancient India, under similar circumstances, the supposed dead man had to pass the first night after his return in a tub filled with a mixture of fat and water; there he sat with doubled-up fists and without uttering a syllable, like a child in the womb, while over him were performed all the sacraments that were wont to be celebrated over a pregnant woman. Next morning he got out of the tub and went through once more all the other sacraments he had formerly partaken of from his youth up; in particular, he married a wife or espoused his old one over again with due solemnity.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-259" id="noteref-1-1-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a></p>
					<p>Amongst the Akikuyu of British East Africa every member of the tribe, whether male or female, has to go through a pretence of being born again. The age at which the ceremony is performed varies with the ability of the father to provide the goat or sheep which is required for the due observance of the rite; but it seems that the new birth generally takes place when a child is about ten years old or younger. If the child’s father or mother is dead, a man or woman acts as proxy on the occasion, and in such a case the woman is thenceforth regarded by the child as its own mother. A goat or sheep is killed in the afternoon and the stomach and intestines are reserved. The ceremony takes place at evening in a hut; none but women are allowed to be present. A circular piece of the goatskin or sheepskin is passed over one shoulder and under the other arm of the child who is to be born again; and the animal’s stomach is similarly passed over the child’s other shoulder and under its other arm. The mother, or the woman who acts as mother, sits on a hide on the floor with the child between her knees. The sheep’s or goat’s gut is passed round her and brought in front of the child. She groans as if in labour, another woman cuts the gut as if it were the navel-string, and the child imitates the cry of a newborn infant. Until a lad has thus been born again in mimicry, he may not assist at the disposal of his father’s body after death, nor help to carry him out into the wilds to breathe his last. Formerly the ceremony of the new birth was combined with the ceremony of circumcision; but the two are now kept separate.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-260" id="noteref-1-1-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> In origin we may suppose that this curious pretence of being born again regularly formed part of the initiatory rites through which every Kikuyu lad and every Kikuyu girl had to pass before he or she was recognised as a full-grown member of the tribe;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-261" id="noteref-1-1-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> for in many parts of the world a simulation of death and resurrection has been enacted by candidates on such occasions as well as on admission to the membership of certain secret societies.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-262" id="noteref-1-1-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> The intention of the mock birth or mock resurrection is not clear; but we may conjecture that it is designed, on the principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic, either to impart to the candidate the powers of a ghost or to enable him to be reborn again into the world whenever he shall have died in good earnest.</p>
					<p>Magical images have often been employed for the amiable purpose of winning love. Thus to shoot an arrow into the heart of a clay image was an ancient Hindu mode of securing a woman’s affection; only the bowstring must be of hemp, the shaft of the arrow must be of black <i>ala</i> wood, its plume an owl’s feather, and its barb a thorn.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-263" id="noteref-1-1-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a> No doubt the wound inflicted on the heart of the clay image was supposed to make a corresponding impression on the woman’s heart. Among the Chippeway Indians there used to be few young men or women who had not little images of the persons whose love they wished to win. They pricked the hearts of the images and inserted magical powders in the punctures, while they addressed the effigies by the names of the persons whom they represented, bidding them requite their affection.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-264" id="noteref-1-1-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a> Ancient witches and wizards melted wax in the fire in order to make the hearts of their sweethearts to melt of love.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-265" id="noteref-1-1-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a> And as the wound of love may be inflicted by an image, so by an image it may be healed. How that can be done is told by Heine in a poem based on the experience of one of his own schoolfellows. It is called <i>The Pilgrimage to Kevlaar</i>, and describes how sick people offer waxen models of their ailing members to the Virgin Mary at Kevlaar in order that she may heal them of their infirmities. In the poem a lover, wasting away for love and sorrow at the death of his sweetheart, offers to the Virgin the waxen model of a heart with a prayer that she would heal his heartache.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-266" id="noteref-1-1-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a> Such customs, still commonly observed in some parts of Catholic Europe, are interesting because they show how in later times magic comes to be incorporated with religion. The moulding of wax images of ailing members is in its origin purely magical: the prayer to the Virgin or to a saint is purely religious: the combination of the two is a crude, if pathetic, attempt to turn both magic and religion to account for the benefit of the sufferer.</p>
					<p>The natives of New Caledonia make use of effigies to maintain or restore harmony between husband and wife. Two spindle-shaped bundles, one representing the man and the other the woman, are tied firmly together to symbolise and ensure the amity of the couple. They are made up of various plants, together with some threads from the woman’s girdle and a piece of the man’s apron; a bone needle forms the axis of each. The talisman is meant to render the union of the spouses indissoluble, and is carefully treasured by them both. If, nevertheless, a domestic jar should unfortunately take place, the husband repairs to the family burying-ground with the precious packet. There he lights a fire with a wood of a particular kind, fumigates the talisman, sprinkles it with water from a prescribed source, waves it round his head, and then stirring the needle in the bundle which represents himself he says, “I change the heart of this woman, that she may love me.” If the wife still remains obdurate, he ties a sugarcane to the bundle, and presents it to her through a third person. If she eats of the sugarcane, she feels her love for her husband revive. On her side she has the right to operate in like manner on the bundle which represents herself, always provided that she does not go to the burying-ground, which is strictly forbidden to women.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-267" id="noteref-1-1-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a></p>
					<p>Another beneficent use of homoeopathic magic is to heal or prevent sickness. In ancient Greece, when a man died of dropsy, his children were made to sit with their feet in water until the body was burned. This was supposed to prevent the disease from attacking them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-268" id="noteref-1-1-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a> Similarly, on the principle of water to water, among the natives of the hills near Rajamahall in India, the body of a person who has died of dropsy is thrown into a river; they think that if the corpse were buried, the disorder would return and carry off other people.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-269" id="noteref-1-1-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a></p>
					<p>The ancient Hindus performed an elaborate ceremony, based on homoeopathetic magic, for the cure of jaundice. Its main drift was to banish the yellow colour to yellow creatures and yellow things, such as the sun, to which it properly belongs, and to procure for the patient a healthy red colour from a living, vigorous source, namely a red bull. With this intention, a priest recited the following spell: “Up to the sun shall go thy heartache and thy jaundice: in the colour of the red bull do we envelop thee! We envelop thee in red tints, unto long life. May this person go unscathed and be free of yellow colour! The cows whose divinity is Rohini, they who, moreover, are themselves red (<i>rohinih</i>)⁠—in their every form and every strength we do envelop thee. Into the parrots, into the thrush, do we put thy jaundice, and, furthermore, into the yellow wagtail do we put thy jaundice.” While he uttered these words, the priest, in order to infuse the rosy hue of health into the sallow patient, gave him water to sip which was mixed with the hair of a red bull; he poured water over the animal’s back and made the sick man drink it; he seated him on the skin of a red bull and tied a piece of the skin to him. Then in order to improve his colour by thoroughly eradicating the yellow taint, he proceeded thus. He first daubed him from head to foot with a yellow porridge made of turmeric or curcuma (a yellow plant), set him on a bed, tied three yellow birds, to wit a parrot, a thrush, and a yellow wagtail, by means of a yellow string to the foot of the bed; then pouring water over the patient, he washed off the yellow porridge, and with it no doubt the jaundice, from him to the birds. After that, by way of giving a final bloom to his complexion, he took some hairs of a red bull, wrapt them in gold leaf, and glued them to the patient’s skin.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-270" id="noteref-1-1-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a> The ancients held that if a person suffering from jaundice looked sharply at a stone-curlew, and the bird looked steadily at him, he was cured of the disease. “Such is the nature,” says Plutarch, “and such the temperament of the creature that it draws out and receives the malady which issues, like a stream, through the eyesight.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-271" id="noteref-1-1-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> So well recognised among bird-fanciers was this valuable property of the stone-curlew that when they had one of these birds for sale they kept it carefully covered, lest a jaundiced person should look at it and be cured for nothing.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-272" id="noteref-1-1-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a> The virtue of the bird lay not in its colour but in its large golden eye, which, if it do not pass for a tuft of yellow lichen, is the first thing that strikes the searcher, as the bird cowers, to escape observation, on the sandy, flint-strewn surface of the ground which it loves to haunt, and with which its drab plumage blends so well that only a practised eye can easily detect it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-273" id="noteref-1-1-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> Thus the yellow eye of the bird drew out the yellow jaundice. Pliny tells of another, or perhaps the same, bird, to which the Greeks gave their name for jaundice, because if a jaundiced man saw it, the disease left him and slew the bird.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-274" id="noteref-1-1-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a> He mentions also a stone which was supposed to cure jaundice because its hue resembled that of a jaundiced skin.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-275" id="noteref-1-1-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> In modern Greece jaundice goes by the name of the Golden Disease, and very naturally it can be healed by gold. To effect a perfect cure all that you have to do is this. Take a piece of gold (best of all an English sovereign, since English gold is the purest) and put it in a measure of wine. Expose the wine with the gold to the stars for three nights; then drink three glasses of it daily till it is used up. By that time the jaundice will be quite washed out of your system. The cure is, in the strictest sense of the word, a sovereign one.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-276" id="noteref-1-1-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a> A Wend cure for jaundice, like the modern Greek one, is to drink a glass of water in which a gold coin has been left overnight.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-277" id="noteref-1-1-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> A remedy based on the principle of contraries is to look steadily at pitch or other black substances.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-278" id="noteref-1-1-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a> In South Russia a Jewish remedy for jaundice is to wear golden bracelets.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-279" id="noteref-1-1-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> Here the great homoeopathic principle is clearly the same as in the preceding cases, though its application is different. In Germany yellow turnips, gold coins, gold rings, saffron, and other yellow things are still esteemed remedies for jaundice, just as a stick of red sealing-wax carried on the person cures the red eruption popularly known as <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony’s fire, or the bloodstone with its blood-red spots allays bleeding.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-280" id="noteref-1-1-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a> Another popular remedy in Germany for the red <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony’s fire and also for bleeding is supplied by the common crossbills. In this bird “after the first moult the difference between the sexes is shown by the hens inclining to yellowish-green, while the cocks become diversified by orange-yellow and red, their plumage finally deepening into a rich crimson-red, varied in places by a flame-colour.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-281" id="noteref-1-1-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a> The smallest reflection may convince us that these gorgeous hues must be endowed with very valuable medical properties. Accordingly in some parts of Bavaria, Saxony, and Bohemia people keep crossbills in cages in order that the red birds may draw the red <abbr>St.</abbr> Antony’s fire and the inflammation of fever to themselves and so relieve the human patient. Often in a peasant’s cottage you may see the red bird in its cage hanging beside a sickbed and drawing to itself the hectic flush from the cheeks of the hot and restless patient, who lies tossing under the blankets. And the dried body of a crossbill has only to be placed on a wound to stop the bleeding at once. It is not the colour only of the feathers which produces this salutary effect; the peculiar shape of the bill, which gives the bird its English and German name, is a contributory cause. For the horny sheaths of the bill cross each other obliquely, and this formation undoubtedly enables the bird to draw diseases to itself more readily than a beak of the common shape could possibly do. Curious observers have even remarked that when the upper bill crosses the lower to the right, the bird will attract the diseases of men, whereas if the upper bill crosses the lower to the left, it will attract the diseases of women. But I cannot vouch for the accuracy of this particular observation. However that may be, certain it is that no fire will break out in a house where a crossbill is kept in a cage, neither will lightning strike the dwelling; and this immunity can only be ascribed to the protective colouring of the bird, the red hue of its plumage serving to ward off the red lightning and to nip a red conflagration in the bud. However, the poor bird seldom lives to old age; nor could this reasonably be expected of a creature which has to endure so much vicarious suffering. It generally falls a victim to one or other of the maladies of which it has relieved our ailing humanity. The causes which have given the crossbill its remarkable colour and the peculiar shape of its bill have escaped many naturalists, but they are familiar to children in Germany. The truth is that when Jesus Christ hung on the cross a flight of crossbills fluttered round him and tugged with their bills at the nails in his hands and feet to draw them out, till their feathers, which were grey before, were all bedabbled with blood, and their beaks, which had been straight, were twisted awry. So red have been their feathers and twisted their beaks from that day to this.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-282" id="noteref-1-1-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a> Another cure prescribed in Germany for <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony’s fire is to rub the patient with ashes from a house that has been burned down;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-283" id="noteref-1-1-283" epub:type="noteref">283</a> for it is easy to see that as the fire died out in that house, so <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony’s fire will die out in that man.</p>
					<p>A curious application of homoeopathic magic to the cure of disease is founded on the old English superstition that if a shrewmouse runs over a beast, be it horse, cow, or sheep, the animal suffers cruelly and may lose the use of its limb. Against this accident the farmer used to keep a shrew-ash at hand as a remedy. A shrew-ash was prepared thus. A deep hole was bored in the tree, and a shrewmouse was thrust in alive and plugged in, probably with some incantations which have been forgotten.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-284" id="noteref-1-1-284" epub:type="noteref">284</a> An ancient Indian cure for a scanty crop of hair was to pour a solution of certain plants over the head of the patient; this had to be done by a doctor who was dressed in black and had eaten black food, and the ceremony must be performed in the early morning, while the stars were fading in the sky, and before the black crows had risen cawing from their nests.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-285" id="noteref-1-1-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a> The exact virtue of these plants has escaped our knowledge, but we can hardly doubt that they were dark and hairy; while the black clothes of the doctor, his black food, and the swarthy hue of the crows unquestionably combined to produce a crop of black hair on the patient’s head. A more disagreeable means of attaining the same end is adopted by some of the tribes of Central Australia. To promote the growth of a boy’s hair a man with flowing locks bites the youth’s scalp as hard as he can, being urged thereto by his friends, who sit round watching him at his task, while the sufferer howls aloud with pain.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-286" id="noteref-1-1-286" epub:type="noteref">286</a> Clearly, on the principle of capillary attraction, if I may say so, he thus imparts of his own mature abundance to the scarcity of his youthful friend.</p>
					<p>One of the great merits of homoeopathic magic is that it enables the cure to be performed on the person of the doctor instead of on that of his victim, who is thus relieved of all trouble and inconvenience, while he sees his medical man writhe in anguish before him. For example, the peasants of Perche, in France, labour under the impression that a prolonged fit of vomiting is brought about by the patient’s stomach becoming unhooked, as they call it, and so falling down. Accordingly, a practitioner is called in to restore the organ to its proper place. After hearing the symptoms he at once throws himself into the most horrible contortions, for the purpose of unhooking his own stomach. Having succeeded in the effort, he next hooks it up again in another series of contortions and grimaces, while the patient experiences a corresponding relief. Fee five francs.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-287" id="noteref-1-1-287" epub:type="noteref">287</a> In like manner a Dyak medicine-man, who has been fetched in a case of illness, will lie down and pretend to be dead. He is accordingly treated like a corpse, is bound up in mats, taken out of the house, and deposited on the ground. After about an hour the other medicine-men loose the pretended dead man and bring him to life; and as he recovers, the sick person is supposed to recover too.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-288" id="noteref-1-1-288" epub:type="noteref">288</a> A cure for a tumour, based on the principle of homoeopathic magic, is prescribed by Marcellus of Bordeaux, court physician to Theodosius the First, in his curious work on medicine. It is as follows. Take a root of vervain, cut it across, and hang one end of it round the patient’s neck, and the other in the smoke of the fire. As the vervain dries up in the smoke, so the tumour will also dry up and disappear. If the patient should afterwards prove ungrateful to the good physician, the man of skill can avenge himself very easily by throwing the vervain into water; for as the root absorbs the moisture once more, the tumour will return.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-289" id="noteref-1-1-289" epub:type="noteref">289</a> The same sapient writer recommends you, if you are troubled with pimples, to watch for a falling star, and then instantly, while the star is still shooting from the sky, to wipe the pimples with a cloth or anything that comes to hand. Just as the star falls from the sky, so the pimples will fall from your body; only you must be very careful not to wipe them with your bare hand, or the pimples will be transferred to it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-290" id="noteref-1-1-290" epub:type="noteref">290</a></p>
					<p>Further, homoeopathic and in general sympathetic magic plays a great part in the measures taken by the rude hunter or fisherman to secure an abundant supply of food. On the principle that like produces like, many things are done by him and his friends in deliberate imitation of the result which he seeks to attain; and, on the other hand, many things are scrupulously avoided because they bear some more or less fanciful resemblance to others which would really be disastrous.</p>
					<p>Nowhere is the theory of sympathetic magic more systematically carried into practice for the maintenance of the food supply than in the barren regions of Central Australia. Here the tribes are divided into a number of totem clans, each of which is charged with the duty of propagating and multiplying their totem for the good of the community by means of magical ceremonies and incantations. The great majority of the totems are edible animals and plants, and the general result supposed to be accomplished by these magical totemic ceremonies or <i>intichiuma</i>, as the Arunta call them, is that of supplying the tribe with food and other necessaries. Often the rites consist of an imitation of the effect which the people desire to produce; in other words, their magic is of the homoeopathic or imitative sort.</p>
					<p>Thus among the Arunta the men of the witchetty grub totem perform a series of elaborate ceremonies for multiplying the grub which the other members of the tribe use as food. One of the ceremonies is a pantomime representing the fully-developed insect in the act of emerging from the chrysalis. A long narrow structure of branches is set up to imitate the chrysalis case of the grub. In this structure a number of men, who have the grub for their totem, sit and sing of the creature in its various stages. Then they shuffle out of it in a squatting posture, and as they do so they sing of the insect emerging from the chrysalis. This is supposed to multiply the numbers of the grubs.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-291" id="noteref-1-1-291" epub:type="noteref">291</a> Again, in order to multiply emus, which are an important article of food, the men of the emu totem in the Arunta tribe proceed as follows. They clear a small spot of level ground, and opening veins in their arms they let the blood stream out until the surface of the ground, for a space of about three square yards, is soaked with it. When the blood has dried and caked, it forms a hard and fairly impermeable surface, on which they paint the sacred design of the emu totem, especially the parts of the bird which they like best to eat, namely, the fat and the eggs. Round this painting the men sit and sing. Afterwards performers, wearing headdresses to represent the long neck and small head of the emu, mimic the appearance of the bird as it stands aimlessly peering about in all directions.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-292" id="noteref-1-1-292" epub:type="noteref">292</a> Again, men of the hakea flower totem in the Arunta tribe perform a ceremony to make the hakea tree burst into blossom. The scene of the ceremony is a little hollow, by the side of which grows an ancient hakea tree. In the middle of the hollow is a small worn block of stone, supposed to represent a mass of hakea flowers. Before the ceremony begins, an old man of the totem carefully sweeps the ground clean, and then strokes the stone all over with his hands. After that the men sit round the stone and chant invitations to the tree to flower much and to the blossoms to be filled with honey. Finally, at the request of the old leader, one of the young men opens a vein in his arm and lets the blood flow freely over the stone, while the rest continue to sing. The flow of blood is supposed to represent the preparation of the favourite drink of the natives, which is made by steeping the hakea flower in water. As soon as the stone is covered with blood the ceremony is complete.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-293" id="noteref-1-1-293" epub:type="noteref">293</a> Again, the men of the kangaroo totem in the Arunta tribe perform ceremonies for the multiplication of kangaroos at a certain rocky ledge, which, in the opinion of the natives, is full of the spirits of kangaroos ready to go forth and inhabit kangaroo bodies. A little higher up on the hillside are two blocks of stone, which represent a male and female kangaroo respectively. At the ceremony these two blocks are rubbed with a stone by two men. Then the rocky ledge below is decorated with alternate vertical stripes of red and white, to indicate the red fur and white bones of the kangaroo. After that a number of young men sit on the ledge, open veins in their arms, and allow the blood to spurtle over the edge of the rock on which they are seated. This pouring out of the blood of the kangaroo men on the rock is thought to drive out the spirits of the kangaroos in all directions, and so to increase the number of the animals. While it is taking place, the other men sit below watching the performers and singing songs which refer to the expected increase of kangaroos.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-294" id="noteref-1-1-294" epub:type="noteref">294</a> In the Kaitish tribe, when the headman of the grass seed totem wishes to make the grass grow, he takes two sacred sticks or stones (<i>churinga</i>) of the well-known bull-roarer pattern, smears them with red-ochre, and decorates them with lines and dots of down to represent grass seed. Then he rubs the sticks or stones together so that the down flies off in all directions. The down is supposed to carry with it some virtue from the sacred stick or stone whereby the grass seed is made to grow. For days afterwards the headman walks about by himself in the bush singing the grass seed and carrying one of the sacred bull-roarers (<i>churinga</i>) with him. At night he hides the implement in the bush and returns to camp, where he may have no intercourse with his wife. For during all this time he is believed to be so full of magic power, derived from the bull-roarer, that if he had intercourse with her the grass seed would not grow properly and his body would swell up when he tasted of it. When the seed begins to grow, he still goes on singing to make it grow more, but when it is fully grown he brings back the sacred implement to his camp hidden in bark; and having gathered a store of the seed he leaves it with the men of the other half of the tribe, saying, “You eat the grass seed in plenty, it is very good and grows in my country.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-295" id="noteref-1-1-295" epub:type="noteref">295</a></p>
					<p>A somewhat similar ceremony is performed by men of the manna totem in the Arunta tribe for the increase of their totem. This manna is a product of the mulga tree (<i>Acacia aneura</i>), and resembles the better-known sugar-manna of gum trees. When the men of the totem wish to multiply the manna, they resort to a great boulder of grey rock, curiously streaked with black and white seams, which is thought to represent a mass of manna deposited there long ago by a man of the totem. The same significance is attributed to other smaller stones which rest on the top of the boulder. The headman of the totem begins the ceremony by digging up a sacred bull-roarer (<i>churinga</i>), which is buried in the earth at the foot of the boulder. It is supposed to represent a lump of manna and to have lain there ever since the remote <i>alcheringa</i> or dream time, the farthest past of which these savages have any conception. Next the headman climbs to the top of the boulder and rubs it with the bull-roarer, and after that he takes the smaller stones and with them rubs the same spot on the boulder. Meantime the other men, sitting round about, chant loudly an invitation to the dust produced by the rubbing of the stones to go out and generate a plentiful supply of manna on the mulga-trees. Finally, with twigs of the mulga the leader sweeps away the dust which has gathered on the surface of the stone; his intention is to cause the dust to settle on the mulga-trees and so produce manna.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-296" id="noteref-1-1-296" epub:type="noteref">296</a></p>
					<p>Again, in a rocky gorge of the Murchison Range there are numbers of little heaps of rounded, water-worn stones, carefully arranged on beds of leaves and hidden away under piles of rougher quartzite blocks. In the opinion of the Warramunga tribe, these rounded stones represent euros, that is, a species of kangaroo. According to their size they stand for young or old, male or female euros. Any old man of the euro totem who happens to pass the spot may take the stones out, smear them with red ochre and rub them well. This is supposed to cause the spirits of euros to pass out from the stones and to be born as animals, thus increasing the food supply.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-297" id="noteref-1-1-297" epub:type="noteref">297</a> Again, in the Warramunga tribe <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Spencer and Gillen saw and heard a ceremony which was believed to multiply white cockatoos to a wonderful extent. From ten o’clock one evening until after sunrise next morning the headman of the white cockatoo totem held in his hand a rude effigy of the cockatoo and imitated the harsh cry of the bird, with exasperating monotony, all night long. When his voice failed him, his son took up the call and relieved the old man until such time as his father was rested enough to begin again.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-298" id="noteref-1-1-298" epub:type="noteref">298</a></p>
					<p>In this last ceremony the homoeopathic or imitative character of the rite is particularly plain: the shape of the bird which is to be multiplied is mimicked by an effigy, its cry is imitated by the human voice. In others of the ceremonies just described the homoeopathic principle works by means of stones, which resemble in shape the edible animals or plants that the natives desire to increase. We shall see presently that the Melanesians similarly attribute fertilising virtues to stones of certain shapes.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-299" id="noteref-1-1-299" epub:type="noteref">299</a> Meantime it deserves to be noticed that in some of these Australian rites for the multiplication of the totemic animals the blood of the men of the totem plays an important part. Similarly in a ceremony performed by men of the Dieri tribe for the multiplication of carpet-snakes and iguanas the performers wound themselves and the blood that drips from their wounds is poured on a sandhill in which a mythical ancestor is believed to be buried and from which carpet-snakes and iguanas are confidently expected to swarm forth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-300" id="noteref-1-1-300" epub:type="noteref">300</a> Again, when the headman of the fish totem in the Wonkgongaru tribe desires to make fish plentiful, he paints himself all over with red ochre, and, taking little pointed bones, goes into a pool. There he pierces his scrotum and the skin around the navel with the bones, and sits down in the water. The blood from the wounds, as it mingles with the water, is supposed to give rise to fish.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-301" id="noteref-1-1-301" epub:type="noteref">301</a> In all these cases clearly a fertilising virtue is ascribed to human blood. The ascription is interesting and may possibly go some way to explain the widely-spread custom of voluntary wounds and mutilations in religious or magical rites. It may therefore be worth while, even at the cost of a digression, to enquire a little more closely into the custom as it is practised by the rude savages of Australia.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-302" id="noteref-1-1-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a></p>
					<p>In the first place, then, the Dieri custom of pouring blood over the supposed remains of the ancestor in his sandhill closely resembles the custom observed by some of the Australian aborigines at the graves of their relatives. Thus among the tribes on the River Darling several men used to stand by the open grave and cut each other’s heads with a boomerang, and then hold their bleeding heads over the grave so that the blood dripped on the corpse at the bottom of it. If the deceased was highly esteemed, the bleeding was repeated after some earth had been thrown on the corpse.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-303" id="noteref-1-1-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a> Among the Arunta it is customary for the women kinsfolk to cut themselves at the grave so that blood flows upon it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-304" id="noteref-1-1-304" epub:type="noteref">304</a> Again, at the Vasse River, in Western Australia, before the body was lowered into the grave, the natives used to gash their thighs, and at the flowing of the blood they all said, “I have brought blood,” and they stamped the foot forcibly on the ground, sprinkling the blood around them; then wiping the wounds with a wisp of leaves, they threw it, all bloody, on the dead man. After that they let the body down into the grave.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-305" id="noteref-1-1-305" epub:type="noteref">305</a> Further, it is a common practice with the Central Australians to give human blood to the sick and aged for the purpose of strengthening them; and in order that the blood may have this effect it need not always be drunk by the infirm person, it is enough to sprinkle it on his body. For example, a young man will often open a vein in his arm and let the blood trickle over the body of an older man in order to strengthen his aged friend; and sometimes the old man will drink a little of the blood.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-306" id="noteref-1-1-306" epub:type="noteref">306</a> So in illness the blood is sometimes applied outwardly as well as inwardly, the patient both drinking it and having it rubbed over his body; sometimes apparently he only drinks it. The blood is drawn from a man or woman who is related to the sufferer either by blood or marriage, and the notion always is to convey to the sick person some of the strength of the blood-giver.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-307" id="noteref-1-1-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a> In the Wiimbaio tribe, if a man had nearly killed his wife in a paroxysm of rage, the woman was laid out on the ground, and the husband’s arms being tightly bound above the elbows, the medicine-man opened the veins in them and allowed the blood to flow on the prostrate body of the victim till the man grew faint.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-308" id="noteref-1-1-308" epub:type="noteref">308</a> The intention of thus bleeding the man over the woman was apparently to restore her to life by means of the blood drawn from her assailant. Again, before an avenging party starts to take the life of a distant enemy, all the men stand up, open veins in their genital organs with sharp flints or pointed sticks, and allow the blood to spurtle over each other’s thighs. This ceremony is supposed to strengthen the men mutually, and also to knit them so closely together that treachery henceforth becomes impossible. Sometimes for the same purpose blood is drawn from the arm and drunk by the men of the avenging party, and if one of them refuses thus to pledge himself the others will force his mouth open and pour the blood into it. After that, even if he wishes to play the traitor and to give the doomed man warning, he cannot do so; he is bound by a physical necessity to side with the avengers whose blood he has swallowed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-309" id="noteref-1-1-309" epub:type="noteref">309</a></p>
					<p>Further, it is worth while to notice some uses made of human blood in connection with the ceremonies of circumcision and subincision, which all lads of the Central Australian tribes have to undergo before they are recognised as full-grown men. For example, the blood drawn from them at these operations is caught in a hollow shield and taken to certain kinsmen or kinswomen, who drink it or have it smeared on their breasts and foreheads.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-310" id="noteref-1-1-310" epub:type="noteref">310</a> The motive of this practice is not mentioned, but on the analogy of the preceding customs we may conjecture that it is to strengthen the relatives who partake of the blood. This interpretation is confirmed by an analogous use in Queensland of the blood drawn from a woman at the operation which in the female sex corresponds to subincision in the male; for that blood, mixed with another ingredient, is kept and drunk as a medicine by any sick person who may be in the camp at the time.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-311" id="noteref-1-1-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a> Moreover, it is corroborated by a similar use of the foreskin which has been removed at circumcision; for among the southern Arunta this piece of skin is given to the younger brother of the circumcised lad and he swallows it, in the belief that it will make him grow strong and tall.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-312" id="noteref-1-1-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a> In the tribe at Fowler’s Bay, who practise both circumcision and subincision, the severed foreskin is swallowed by the operator,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-313" id="noteref-1-1-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a> perhaps in order to strengthen the lad sympathetically. In some tribes of Northwest Australia it is the lad himself who swallows his own foreskin mixed with kangaroo flesh; while in other tribes of the same region the severed portion is taken by the relations and deposited under the bark of a large tree.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-314" id="noteref-1-1-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a> The possible significance of this latter treatment of the foreskin will appear presently. Among the Kolkodoons of Cloniny, in Northern Queensland, the foreskin is strung on twine made of human hair, and is then tied round the mother’s neck “to keep off the devil.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-315" id="noteref-1-1-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a> In the Warramunga tribe the old men draw blood from their own subincised urethras in presence of the lads who a few days before have undergone the operation of subincision. The object of this custom, we are told, is to promote the healing of the young men’s wounds and to strengthen them generally.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-316" id="noteref-1-1-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> It does not appear that the blood of the old men is drunk by or smeared upon the youths; seemingly it is supposed to benefit them sympathetically without direct contact. A similar action of blood at a distance may partly explain a very singular custom observed by the Arunta women at the moment when a lad is being subincised. The operation is performed at a distance from, but within hearing of, the women’s camp. When the boy is seized in order to be operated on, the men of the party raise a loud shout of “Pirr-rr.” At that sound the women immediately assemble in their camp, and the boy’s mother cuts gashes across the stomach and shoulders of the boy’s sisters, her own elder sisters, an old woman who furnished the boy with a sacred fire at circumcision, and all the women whose daughters he would be allowed to marry; and while she cuts she imitates the sound made by the men who are subincising her son. These cuts generally leave behind them a definite series of scars; they have a name of their own (<i>urpma</i>), and are often represented by definite lines on the bull-roarers.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-317" id="noteref-1-1-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a> What the exact meaning of this extraordinary ceremony may be, I cannot say; but perhaps one of its supposed effects may be to relieve the boy’s pain by transferring it to his women-kind. In like manner, when the Warramunga men are fighting each other with blazing torches, the women burn themselves with lighted twigs in the belief that by so doing they prevent the men from inflicting serious injuries on each other.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-318" id="noteref-1-1-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a> The theory further receives some support from certain practices formerly observed by the natives inhabiting the coast of New South Wales. Before lads had their noses bored, the medicine men threw themselves into contortions on the ground, and after pretending to suffer great pain were delivered of bones, which were to be used at the ceremony of nose-boring. The lads were told that the more the medicine men suffered, the less pain they themselves would feel.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-319" id="noteref-1-1-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a> Again, among the same natives, when a woman was in labour, a female friend would tie one end of a cord round the sufferer’s neck and rub her own gums with the other end till they bled,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-320" id="noteref-1-1-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> probably in order to draw away the pain from the mother to herself. For a similar reason, perhaps, in Samoa, while blood was being drawn from a virgin bride, her friends, young and old, beat their heads with stones till they bled.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-321" id="noteref-1-1-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a></p>
					<p>Lastly, in some tribes the blood shed at the circumcision and subincision of lads is collected in paper bark and buried in the bank of a pool where water-lilies grow; this is supposed to promote the growth of the lilies.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-322" id="noteref-1-1-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a> Needless to say, this rude attempt at horticulture is not prompted by a simple delight in contemplating these beautiful bright blue flowers which bloom in the Australian wilderness, decking the surface of pools by countless thousands. The savages feed on the stems and roots of the lilies; that is why they desire to cultivate them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-323" id="noteref-1-1-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> In this last practice a fertilising virtue is clearly attributed to the blood of circumcision and subincision. The Anula tribe, who among others observe the custom, obviously ascribe the same virtue to the severed foreskin, for they bury it also by the side of a pool.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-324" id="noteref-1-1-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a> The Warramunga entertain the same opinion of this part of the person, for they place the foreskin in a hole made by a witchetty grub in a tree, believing that it will cause a plentiful supply of these edible grubs.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-325" id="noteref-1-1-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a> Among the Unmatjera the custom is somewhat different, but taken in connection with their traditions it is even more significant. The boy puts his severed foreskin on a shield, covers it up with a broad spear-thrower, and then carries it in the darkness of night, lest any woman should see what he is doing, to a hollow tree in which he deposits it. He tells no one where he has hidden it, except a man who stands to him in the relation of father’s sister’s son. Nowadays there is no special relation between the boy and the tree, but formerly the case seems to have been different. For according to tradition the early mythical ancestors of the tribe placed their foreskins in their <i>nanja</i> trees, that is, in their local totem centres, the trees from which their spirits came forth at birth and to which they would return after death.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-326" id="noteref-1-1-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a> If, as seems highly probable, such a custom as that recorded by the tradition ever prevailed, its intention could hardly be any other than that of securing the future birth and reincarnation of the owner of the foreskin when he should have died and his spirit returned to its abode in the tree. For among all these Central tribes the belief is firmly rooted that the human soul undergoes an endless series of reincarnations, the living men and women of one generation being nothing but the spirits of their ancestors come to life again, and destined to be themselves reborn in the persons of their descendants. During the interval between two incarnations the souls live in their <i>nanja</i> spots or local totem centres, which are always natural objects such as trees or rocks. Each totem clan has a number of such totem centres scattered over the country. There the souls of the dead men and women of the totem, but of no other, congregate during their disembodied state, and thence they issue and are born again in human form when a favourable opportunity presents itself.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-327" id="noteref-1-1-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a> It might well be thought that a man’s new birth would be facilitated if, in his lifetime, he could lay up a stock of vital energy for the use of his disembodied spirit after death. That he did, apparently, by detaching a portion of himself, namely the foreskin, and depositing it in his <i>nanja</i> tree, or rock, or whatever it might be.</p>
					<p>Is it possible that in this belief and this practice we have the long lost key to the meaning of circumcision? In other words, can it be that circumcision was originally intended to ensure the rebirth at some future time of the circumcised man by disposing of the severed portion of his body in such a way as to provide him with a stock of energy on which his disembodied spirit could draw when the critical moment of reincarnation came round? The conjecture is confirmed by the observation that among the Akikuyu of British East Africa the ceremony of circumcision used to be regularly combined with a graphic pretence of rebirth enacted by the novice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-328" id="noteref-1-1-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> If this should prove to be indeed the clue to the meaning of circumcision, it would be natural to look for an explanation of subincision along the same lines. Now we have seen that the blood of subincision is used both to strengthen relatives and to make water-lilies grow. Hence we may conjecture that the strengthening and fertilising virtue of the blood was applied, like the foreskin at circumcision, to lay up a store of energy in the <i>nanja</i> spot against the time when the man’s feeble ghost would need it. The intention of both ceremonies would thus be to ensure the future reincarnation of the individual by quickening the local totem centre, the home of his disembodied spirit, with a vital portion of himself. That portion, whether the foreskin or the blood, was in a manner seed sown to grow up and provide his immortal spirit with a new body when his old body should have mouldered in the dust.</p>
					<p>Perhaps the same theory may serve to explain another initiatory rite practised by some of the Australian aborigines, namely, the knocking out of teeth. This is the principal ceremony of initiation amongst the tribes of eastern and southeastern Australia; and it is often practised, though not as an initiatory rite, by the Central tribes, with whom the essential rites of initiation are circumcision and subincision.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-329" id="noteref-1-1-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> On the hypothesis here suggested, we should expect to find the tooth regarded as a vital part of the man which was sacrificed to ensure another life for him after death. The durability of the teeth, compared to the corruptible nature of the greater part of the body, might be a sufficient reason with a savage philosopher for choosing this portion of the corporeal frame on which to pin his hope of immortality. The evidence at our disposal certainly does not suffice to establish this explanation of the rite; but there are some facts which seem to point in that direction. In the first place, the extracted tooth is supposed to remain in sympathetic connection with the man from whom it has been removed; and if proper care is not taken of it, he may fall ill.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-330" id="noteref-1-1-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a> With some Victorian tribes the practice was for the mother of the lad to choose a young gum-tree and to insert her son’s teeth in the bark, at the fork of two of the topmost boughs. Ever afterwards the tree was held in a sense sacred. It was made known only to certain persons of the tribe, and the youth himself was never allowed to learn where his teeth had been deposited. When he died, the tree was killed by fire.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-331" id="noteref-1-1-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> Thus in a fashion the tree might be said to be bound up with the life of the man whose teeth it contained, since when he died it was destroyed. Further, among some of the Central tribes the extracted tooth is thrown away as far as possible in the direction of the spot where the man’s mother is supposed to have had her camp in the far-off legendary time which is known as the <i>alcheringa</i>.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-332" id="noteref-1-1-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> May not this be done to secure the rebirth of the man’s spirit in that place? In the Gnanji tribe the extracted tooth is buried by the man’s or woman’s mother beside a pool, for the purpose of stopping the rain and increasing the number of water-lilies that grow in the pool.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-333" id="noteref-1-1-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> Thus the same fertilising virtue is ascribed to the tooth which is attributed to the foreskin severed at circumcision and to the blood drawn at subincision. Why the drawing of teeth should be supposed to stop rain, I cannot guess. Curiously enough, among the Central tribes generally, the extraction of teeth has a special association with rain and water. Thus among the Arunta it is practised chiefly by the members of the rain or water totem; and it is nearly if not quite obligatory on all the men and women of that totem, whereas it is merely optional with members of the other clans. Further, the ceremony is always performed among the Arunta immediately after the magical ceremony for the making of rain.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-334" id="noteref-1-1-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> In the Warramunga tribe the knocking out of the teeth generally takes place towards the end of the wet season, when the water-holes are full, and the natives do not wish any more rain to fall. Moreover, it is always performed on the banks of a water-hole. The persons to be operated on enter the pool, fill their mouths with water, spit it out in all directions, and splash the water over themselves, taking care to wet thoroughly the crown of the head. Immediately afterwards the tooth is knocked out. The Chingilli also knock out teeth towards the close of the wet season, when they think they have had enough of rain. The extracted tooth is thrown into a water-hole, in the belief that it will drive rain and clouds away.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-335" id="noteref-1-1-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> I merely note, without attempting to account for, this association between the extraction of teeth and the stopping of rain.</p>
					<p>The natives of the Cape York Peninsula in Queensland use the extraction of the tooth to determine both a man’s totem and the country to which he belongs. While the tooth is being knocked out, they mention the various districts owned or frequented by the lad’s mother, her father, or other of her relatives. The one which happens to be mentioned at the moment when the tooth breaks away is the country to which the lad belongs in future, that is, the country where he will have the right to hunt and to gather roots and fruits. Further, the bloody spittle which he ejects after the extraction of the tooth is examined by the old men, who trace some likeness between it and a natural object, such as an animal, a plant, or a stone. Henceforth that object will be the young man’s <i>ari</i> or totem.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-336" id="noteref-1-1-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> Some light is thrown on this ceremony by a parallel custom which the natives of the Pennefather River in Queensland observe at the birth of a child. They believe that every person’s spirit undergoes a series of reincarnations, and that during the interval between two successive reincarnations the spirit stays in one or other of the haunts of Anjea, the being who causes conception in women by putting mud babies into their wombs. Hence, in order to determine where the new baby’s spirit resided since it was last in the flesh, they mention Anjea’s haunts one after the other while the grandmother is cutting the child’s navel-string; and the place which happens to be mentioned when the navel-string breaks is the spot where the spirit lodged since its last incarnation. That is the country to which the child belongs; there he will have the right of hunting when he grows up. Hence, according to the home from which its spirit came to dwell among men, a child may be known as a baby obtained from a tree, a rock, or a pool of fresh water. Anjea, with whom the souls of the dead live till their time comes to be born again, is never seen; but you may hear him laughing in the depths of the woods, among the rocks, down in the lagoons, and along the mangrove swamps.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-337" id="noteref-1-1-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a> Hence we may fairly infer that the country assigned to a man of the Cape York Peninsula at the extraction of his tooth is the one where his spirit tarried during the interval which elapsed since its last incarnation. His totem, which is determined at the same time, may possibly be the animal, plant, or other natural object in which his spirit resided since its last embodiment in human form, or perhaps rather in which a part of his spirit may be supposed to lodge outside of his body during life. The latter view is favoured by the belief of the tribe of the Pennefather River, whose practice at childbirth so closely resembles that of the Cape York natives at puberty; for the Pennefather people hold that during a man’s life a portion of his spirit lodges outside of his body in his afterbirth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-338" id="noteref-1-1-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a> However that may be, it seems probable that among the Cape York natives the custom of knocking out the tooth is closely associated with a theory of reincarnation. Perhaps the same theory explains a privilege enjoyed by the Kamilaroi tribe of New South Wales. They claimed a superiority over the surrounding tribes, and enforced their claim by exacting from them the teeth knocked out at puberty. The exaction of this tribute might have passed for a mere assertion of suzerainty, were it not that the Kamilaroi knocked out their own teeth also.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-339" id="noteref-1-1-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a> Perhaps the extracted teeth were believed to secure to their present possessors a magical control over their former owners, not only during life but after death, so that armed with them the Kamilaroi could help or hinder the rebirth of their departed friends or enemies.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-340" id="noteref-1-1-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a></p>
					<p>Thus, if I am right, the essential feature in all the three great initiatory rites of the Australians is the removal of a vital part of the person which shall serve as a link between two successive incarnations by preparing for the novice a new body to house his spirit when its present tabernacle shall have been worn out. Now, if there is any truth in this suggestion, we should expect to find that measures to ensure reincarnation are also taken at death and burial. This seems in fact to be done. For, in the first place, the practice of pouring the blood of kinsmen and kinswomen into the grave is obviously susceptible of this explanation, since, in accordance with the Australian usages which I have cited, the blood might well be thought to strengthen the feeble ghost for a new birth. The same may be said of the Australian custom of depositing hair with the dead,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-341" id="noteref-1-1-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a> for it is a common notion that the hair is the seat of strength.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-342" id="noteref-1-1-342" epub:type="noteref">342</a> Again, it has been a rule with some Australian tribes to bury their dead on the spot where they were born.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-343" id="noteref-1-1-343" epub:type="noteref">343</a> This was very natural if they desired the dead man to be born again. Further, the common Australian practice of depositing the dead in trees​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-344" id="noteref-1-1-344" epub:type="noteref">344</a> may, in some cases at least, have been designed to facilitate rebirth; for trees are often the places in which the souls of the dead reside, and from which they come forth to be born again in human shape. Thus the Unmatjera and Kaitish tribes bury very aged women and decrepit old men in the ground; but the bodies of children, young women, and men in the prime of life are laid on platforms among the boughs of trees; and in regard to children we are definitely told that this is done in the hope that “before very long its spirit may come back again and enter the body of a woman⁠—in all probability that of its former mother.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-345" id="noteref-1-1-345" epub:type="noteref">345</a> Further, the Arunta, who bury their dead, are careful to leave a low depression on one side of the mound, in order that the spirit may pass out and in; and this depression always faces towards the dead man’s or woman’s camping-ground in the <i>alcheringa</i> or remote past, that is, the spot which he or she inhabited in spirit form.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-346" id="noteref-1-1-346" epub:type="noteref">346</a> Is not this done to let the spirit rid itself of its decaying tabernacle and repair to the place where in due time it will find a new and better body? In this connection the final burial rites in the Binbinga, Anula, and Mara tribes are worthy of remark. Among these people the bones of the dead are, after a series of ceremonies, deposited in a hollow log, on which the dead man’s totem is painted. This log is then placed, with the bones, in the boughs of a tree beside a pool, so that if possible it overhangs the water. For about three wet seasons the father and son of the deceased, who placed the log there, are alone allowed to eat water-lilies out of that pool, and no woman is permitted to go near the spot. There the bones of the dead man remain till the log rots and they fall into the water or are carried away by a flood. When the burial rites are all over, the spirit of the deceased returns to its <i>mungai</i> spot, that is, to the place where it dwells in the interval between two successive incarnations. Sooner or later it will be born again.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-347" id="noteref-1-1-347" epub:type="noteref">347</a> These rites seem, therefore, clearly to be a preparation for the new birth.</p>
					<p>As the belief in reincarnation is shared by many peoples besides the Australians, it is natural to suppose that funeral rites intended to facilitate the rebirth of the deceased may be found in other parts of the world. Elsewhere I have cited examples of these rites:​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-348" id="noteref-1-1-348" epub:type="noteref">348</a> here I will add a few more. It is especially the bodies of dead infants which are the object of such ceremonies; for since their lives have been cut prematurely short, it seems reasonable to give their souls a chance of beginning again and lengthening out their existence on earth to its natural close. But it is not always dead babies only whom the living seek thus to bring back to life. For example, we read that round about Mount Elgon in East Africa “the custom of throwing out the dead is universal among all the clans of Bagishu, except in the case of the youngest child or the old grandfather or grandmother, for whom, like the child, a prolonged life on earth is desired.⁠ ⁠… When it is desired to perpetuate on the earth the life of some old man or woman, or that of some young baby, the corpse is buried inside the house or just under the eaves, until another child is born to the nearest relation of the corpse. This child, male or female, takes the name of the corpse, and the Bagishu firmly believe that the spirit of the dead has passed into this new child and lives again on earth. The remains are then dug up and thrown out into the open.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-349" id="noteref-1-1-349" epub:type="noteref">349</a> Similarly among the tribes of the Lower Congo “a baby is always buried near the house of its mother, never in the bush. They think that, if the child is not buried near its mother’s house, she will be unlucky and never have any more children. It is believed that the only new thing about a child is its body. The spirit is old and formerly belonged to some deceased person, or it may have the spirit of some living person. They have two reasons for believing this. The child speaks early of strange things the mother has never taught it, so that they believe the old spirit is talking in the child. Again, if the child is like its mother, father, or uncle, they think it has the spirit of the person it resembles, and that that person will soon die. Hence a parent will resent it if you say that the baby is like him or her.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-350" id="noteref-1-1-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a> Thus it appears that the argument for the preexistence of the human soul, which Plato and Wordsworth​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-351" id="noteref-1-1-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a> drew from reminiscence, is fully accepted by some negro tribes of West Africa. In the Bilaspore district of India “a stillborn child, or one who has passed away before the <i>Chhatti</i> (the sixth day, the day of purification) is not taken out of the house for burial, but is placed in an earthen vessel (a <i>gharā</i>) and is buried in the doorway or in the yard of the house. Some say that this is done in order that the mother may bear another child.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-352" id="noteref-1-1-352" epub:type="noteref">352</a> It is said that among the Kondhs of India, on the day after a death, some boiled rice and a small fowl are taken to the place where the body was burned; there the fowl is split down the breast and placed on the spot, after which it is eaten and the soul of the departed is invited to enter a newborn child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-353" id="noteref-1-1-353" epub:type="noteref">353</a> On the fifth day after a death the Gonds perform the ceremony of bringing back the soul. They go to the riverside and call aloud the name of the deceased. Then they enter the river, catch a fish or an insect, and taking it home place it among the sainted dead of the family, believing that the spirit of their lost one has thus been brought back to the house. Sometimes the fish or insect is eaten in order that the spirit which it contains may be born again as a child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-354" id="noteref-1-1-354" epub:type="noteref">354</a> When a baby died within a month or two of birth, the Hurons did not dispose of its little body like those of grown people by depositing it on a scaffold; they buried it beside the road in order, so they said, that the child might enter secretly into the womb of some woman passing by and be born again into the world.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-355" id="noteref-1-1-355" epub:type="noteref">355</a> Some of the ancient rules observed with regard to funerals in the Greek island of Ceos have been ingeniously explained by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. B.</abbr> Jevons as designed to secure the rebirth of the departed in one of the women of the family.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-356" id="noteref-1-1-356" epub:type="noteref">356</a> The widespread custom of burying the dead in the house was perhaps instituted for the same purpose,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-357" id="noteref-1-1-357" epub:type="noteref">357</a> and the ancient Greek practice of sacrificing to the dead man at the grave on his birthday may possibly have originated in the same train of thought.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-358" id="noteref-1-1-358" epub:type="noteref">358</a> For example, sacrifices were annually offered on their birthdays to Hippocrates by the Coans, to Aratus by the Sicyonians, and to Epicurus by his disciples.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-359" id="noteref-1-1-359" epub:type="noteref">359</a></p>
					<p>Now too we can fully understand the meaning of the bloody ritual in the ceremonies for the multiplication of the totem animals and plants. We have seen that a strengthening and fertilising virtue is attributed to human blood. What more natural than that it should be poured out by the men of the totem on the spot in which the disembodied spirits of the totem animals or plants are waiting for reincarnation? Clearly the rite seems intended to enable these spirits to take bodily shape and be born again, in order that they may again serve as food, if not to the men of the totem clan, at least to all the other numbers of the tribe. Later on we shall find that the attempt to reincarnate the souls of dead animals, in order that their bodies may be eaten over again, is not peculiar to the Australian savages, but is practised with many curious rites by peoples in other parts of the world.</p>
					<p>To sum up briefly the general theory to which the foregoing facts have thus far led us, I would say that just as the <i>intichiuma</i> rites of the Australians are, for the most part, magical ceremonies intended to secure the reimbodiment of the spirits of edible animals and plants, so their initiatory rites may perhaps be regarded as magical ceremonies designed mainly to ensure the reincarnation of human souls. Now the motive for procuring the rebirth of animals and plants is simply the desire to eat them. May not this have been one motive for attempting to resuscitate the human dead? It would seem so, for all the tribes on the Gulf of Carpentaria who have been examined by Spencer and Gillen eat their dead,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-360" id="noteref-1-1-360" epub:type="noteref">360</a> and the ceremonies and traditions of the Arunta indicate that their ancestors also ate the bodies of their fellow tribesmen.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-361" id="noteref-1-1-361" epub:type="noteref">361</a> In this respect the practice of the Binbinga tribe is particularly instructive. For among them the bodies of the dead are cut up and eaten, not by men of the same tribal subclass as the deceased, but by men belonging to the subclasses which compose the other intermarrying half of the tribe.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-362" id="noteref-1-1-362" epub:type="noteref">362</a> This is exactly analogous to the practice which at present prevails as to the eating of the totem animal or plant among all these central and northern tribes. Among them each clan that has an edible animal or plant for its totem is supposed to provide that animal or plant for all the other clans to eat; and similarly among the Binbinga the men of any particular subclass do actually provide their own bodies for the members of the other intermarrying half of the tribe to devour. And just as in the far past the members of a totem clan appear to have subsisted regularly (though not exclusively, and perhaps not even mainly) on their totem animal or plant,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-363" id="noteref-1-1-363" epub:type="noteref">363</a> so at a remote time they seem regularly to have eaten each other. Thus the Wild Dog clan of the Arunta has many traditions that their ancestors killed and ate Wild Dog men and women.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-364" id="noteref-1-1-364" epub:type="noteref">364</a> Such traditions probably preserve a true reminiscence of a state of things still more savage than the present practice of the Binbinga. At that more or less remote time, if we may trust the scattered hints of custom and legend which are the only evidence we have to go upon, the men and women of a totem clan, in defiance of the customs of a later age, regularly cohabited with each other,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-365" id="noteref-1-1-365" epub:type="noteref">365</a> ate their totems, and devoured each other’s dead bodies. In such a state of things there was no sharp line of distinction drawn, either in theory or in practice, between a man and his totem; and this confusion is again confirmed by the legends, from which it is often difficult to make out whether the totemic ancestor spoken of is a man or an animal.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-366" id="noteref-1-1-366" epub:type="noteref">366</a> And if measures were taken to resuscitate both, it may well have been primarily in order that both might be eaten again. The system was thoroughly practical in its aim; only the means it took to compass its ends were mistaken. It was in no sense a religion, unless we are prepared to bestow the name of religion on the business of the grazier and the market-gardener; for these savages certainly bred animals and plants, and perhaps bred men, for much the same reasons that a grazier and a market-gardener breed cattle and vegetables. But whereas the methods of the grazier and market-gardener rest upon the laws of nature, and therefore do really produce the effects they aim at, the methods of these savages are based on a mistaken conception of natural law, and therefore totally fail to bring about the intended result. Only they do not perceive their failure. Kindly nature, if we may personify her for a moment, draws a veil before their eyes, and herself works behind the veil those wonders of reproduction which the poor savage vainly fancies that he has wrought by his magical ceremonies and incantations. In short, totemism, as it exists at present among these tribes, appears to be mainly a crude, almost childlike attempt to satisfy the primary wants of man, especially under the hard conditions to which he is subject in the deserts of Central Australia, by magically creating everything that a savage stands in need of, and food first of all. But to say so is not to affirm that this has been the purpose, and the only purpose, of Australian totemism from the beginning. That beginning lies far behind us in the past, and is therefore necessarily much more obscure and uncertain than the function of totemism as a fully developed system, to which alone the preceding remarks are applicable.</p>
					<p>Our examination of the magical rites performed by the Australians for the maintenance of the food supply has led us into this digression. It is time to pass to ceremonies practised for the same purpose and on the same principles by peoples in other parts of the world.</p>
					<hr/>
					<p>The Indians of British Columbia live largely upon the fish which abound in their seas and rivers. If the fish do not come in due season, and the Indians are hungry, a Nootka wizard will make an image of a swimming fish and put it into the water in the direction from which the fish generally appear. This ceremony, accompanied by a prayer to the fish to come, will cause them to arrive at once.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-367" id="noteref-1-1-367" epub:type="noteref">367</a> The islanders of Torres Straits use models of dugong and turtles to charm dugong and turtle to their destruction.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-368" id="noteref-1-1-368" epub:type="noteref">368</a> The Toradjas of Central Celebes believe that things of the same sort attract each other by means of their indwelling spirits or vital ether. Hence they hang up the jawbones of deer and wild pigs in their houses, in order that the spirits which animate these bones may draw the living creatures of the same kind into the path of the hunter.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-369" id="noteref-1-1-369" epub:type="noteref">369</a> In the island of Nias, when a wild pig has fallen into the pit prepared for it, the animal is taken out and its back is rubbed with nine fallen leaves, in the belief that this will make nine more wild pigs fall into the pit, just as the nine leaves fell from the tree.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-370" id="noteref-1-1-370" epub:type="noteref">370</a> In the East Indian islands of Saparoea, Haroekoe, and Noessa Laut, when a fisherman is about to set a trap for fish in the sea, he looks out for a tree, of which the fruit has been much pecked at by birds. From such a tree he cuts a stout branch and makes of it the principal post in his fish-trap; for he believes that just as the tree lured many birds to its fruit, so the branch cut from that tree will lure many fish to the trap.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-371" id="noteref-1-1-371" epub:type="noteref">371</a></p>
					<p>The western tribes of British New Guinea employ a charm to aid the hunter in spearing dugong or turtle. A small beetle, which haunts coconut trees, is placed in the hole of the spear-haft into which the spearhead fits. This is supposed to make the spearhead stick fast in the dugong or turtle, just as the beetle sticks fast to a man’s skin when it bites him.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-372" id="noteref-1-1-372" epub:type="noteref">372</a> When a Cambodian hunter has set his nets and taken nothing, he strips himself naked, goes some way off, then strolls up to the net as if he did not see it, lets himself be caught in it, and cries, “Hillo! what’s this? I’m afraid I’m caught.” After that the net is sure to catch game.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-373" id="noteref-1-1-373" epub:type="noteref">373</a> A pantomime of the same sort has been acted within living memory in our Scottish Highlands. The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> James Macdonald, now of Reay in Caithness, tells us that in his boyhood when he was fishing with companions about Loch Aline and they had had no bites for a long time, they used to make a pretence of throwing one of their fellows overboard and hauling him out of the water, as if he were a fish; after that the trout or silloch would begin to nibble, according as the boat was on fresh or salt water.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-374" id="noteref-1-1-374" epub:type="noteref">374</a> Before a Carrier Indian goes out to snare martens, he sleeps by himself for about ten nights beside the fire with a little stick pressed down on his neck. This naturally causes the fall-stick of his trap to drop down on the neck of the marten.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-375" id="noteref-1-1-375" epub:type="noteref">375</a> Among the Galelareese, who inhabit a district in the northern part of Halmahera, a large island to the west of New Guinea, it is a maxim that when you are loading your gun to go out shooting, you should always put the bullet in your mouth before you insert it in the gun; for by so doing you practically eat the game that is to be hit by the bullet, which therefore cannot possibly miss the mark.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-376" id="noteref-1-1-376" epub:type="noteref">376</a> A Malay who has baited a trap for crocodiles, and is awaiting results, is careful in eating his curry always to begin by swallowing three lumps of rice successively; for this helps the bait to slide more easily down the crocodile’s throat. He is equally scrupulous not to take any bones out of his curry; for, if he did, it seems clear that the sharp-pointed stick on which the bait is skewered would similarly work itself loose, and the crocodile would get off with the bait. Hence in these circumstances it is prudent for the hunter, before he begins his meal, to get somebody else to take the bones out of his curry, otherwise he may at any moment have to choose between swallowing a bone and losing the crocodile.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-377" id="noteref-1-1-377" epub:type="noteref">377</a></p>
					<p>This last rule is an instance of the things which the hunter abstains from doing lest, on the principle that like produces like, they should spoil his luck. For it is to be observed that the system of sympathetic magic is not merely composed of positive precepts; it comprises a very large number of negative precepts, that is, prohibitions. It tells you not merely what to do, but also what to leave undone. The positive precepts are charms: the negative precepts are taboos. In fact the whole doctrine of taboo, or at all events a large part of it, would seem to be only a special application of sympathetic magic, with its two great laws of similarity and contact.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-378" id="noteref-1-1-378" epub:type="noteref">378</a> Though these laws are certainly not formulated in so many words nor even conceived in the abstract by the savage, they are nevertheless implicitly believed by him to regulate the course of nature quite independently of human will. He thinks that if he acts in a certain way, certain consequences will inevitably follow in virtue of one or other of these laws; and if the consequences of a particular act appear to him likely to prove disagreeable or dangerous, he is naturally careful not to act in that way lest he should incur them. In other words, he abstains from doing that which, in accordance with his mistaken notions of cause and effect, he falsely believes would injure him; in short, he subjects himself to a taboo. Thus taboo is so far a negative application of practical magic. Positive magic or sorcery says, “Do this in order that so-and-so may happen.” Negative magic or taboo says, “Do not do this, lest so-and-so should happen.” The aim of positive magic or sorcery is to produce a desired event; the aim of negative magic or taboo is to avoid an undesirable one. But both consequences, the desirable and the undesirable, are supposed to be brought about in accordance with the laws of similarity and contact. And just as the desired consequence is not really effected by the observance of a magical ceremony, so the dreaded consequence does not really result from the violation of a taboo. If the supposed evil necessarily followed a breach of taboo, the taboo would not be a taboo but a precept of morality or common sense. It is not a taboo to say, “Do not put your hand in the fire”; it is a rule of common sense, because the forbidden action entails a real, not an imaginary evil. In short, those negative precepts which we call taboo are just as vain and futile as those positive precepts which we call sorcery. The two things are merely opposite sides or poles of one great disastrous fallacy, a mistaken conception of the association of ideas. Of that fallacy, sorcery is the positive, and taboo the negative pole. If we give the general name of magic to the whole erroneous system, both theoretical and practical, then taboo may be defined as the negative side of practical magic. To put this in tabular form:⁠—</p>
					<ul id="ulp113">
						<li>Magic <ul><li>Theoretical (Magic as a pseudoscience)</li> <li>Practical (Magic as a pseudo-art) <ul><li>Positive Magic or Sorcery</li> <li>Negative Magic or Taboo</li></ul></li></ul></li>
					</ul>
					<p>I have made these remarks on taboo and its relations to magic because I am about to give some instances of taboos observed by hunters, fishermen, and others, and I wished to show that they fall under the head of Sympathetic Magic, being only particular applications of that general theory. Thus, it is a rule with the Galelareese that when you have caught fish and strung them on a line, you may not cut the line through, or next time you go a-fishing your fishing-line will be sure to break.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-379" id="noteref-1-1-379" epub:type="noteref">379</a> Among the Eskimo of Baffin Land boys are forbidden to play cat’s cradle, because if they did so their fingers might in later life become entangled in the harpoon-line.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-380" id="noteref-1-1-380" epub:type="noteref">380</a> Here the taboo is obviously an application of the law of similarity, which is the basis of homoeopathic magic: as the child’s fingers are entangled by the string in playing cat’s cradle, so they will be entangled by the harpoon-line when he is a man and hunts whales. Again, among the Huzuls, who inhabit the wooded northeastern slopes of the Carpathian Mountains, the wife of a hunter may not spin while her husband is eating, or the game will turn and wind like the spindle, and the hunter will be unable to hit it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-381" id="noteref-1-1-381" epub:type="noteref">381</a> Here again the taboo is clearly derived from the law of similarity. So, too, in most parts of ancient Italy women were forbidden by law to spin on the highroads as they walked, or even to carry their spindles openly, because any such action was believed to injure the crops.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-382" id="noteref-1-1-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a> Probably the notion was that the twirling of the spindle would twirl the cornstalks and prevent them from growing straight. So, too, among the Ainos of Saghalien a pregnant woman may not spin nor twist ropes for two months before her delivery, because they think that if she did so the child’s guts might be entangled like the thread.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-383" id="noteref-1-1-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a> For a like reason in Bilaspore, a district of India, when the chief men of a village meet in council, no one present should twirl a spindle; for they think that if such a thing were to happen, the discussion, like the spindle, would move in a circle and never be wound up.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-384" id="noteref-1-1-384" epub:type="noteref">384</a> In the East Indian islands of Saparoea, Haroekoe, and Noessa Laut, anyone who comes to the house of a hunter must walk straight in; he may not loiter at the door, for were he to do so, the game would in like manner stop in front of the hunter’s snares and then turn back, instead of being caught in the trap.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-385" id="noteref-1-1-385" epub:type="noteref">385</a> For a similar reason it is a rule with the Toradjas of Central Celebes that no one may stand or loiter on the ladder of a house where there is a pregnant woman, for such delay would retard the birth of the child;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-386" id="noteref-1-1-386" epub:type="noteref">386</a> and in various parts of Sumatra the woman herself in these circumstances is forbidden to stand at the door or on the top rung of the house-ladder under pain of suffering hard labour for her imprudence in neglecting so elementary a precaution.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-387" id="noteref-1-1-387" epub:type="noteref">387</a> Malays engaged in the search for camphor eat their food dry and take care not to pound their salt fine. The reason is that the camphor occurs in the form of small grains deposited in the cracks of the trunk of the camphor-tree. Accordingly it seems plain to the Malay that if, while seeking for camphor, he were to eat his salt finely ground, the camphor would be found also in fine grains; whereas by eating his salt coarse he ensures that the grains of the camphor will also be large.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-388" id="noteref-1-1-388" epub:type="noteref">388</a> Camphor hunters in Borneo use the leathery sheath of the leafstalk of the Penang palm as a plate for food, and during the whole of the expedition they will never wash the plate, for fear that the camphor might dissolve and disappear from the crevices of the tree.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-389" id="noteref-1-1-389" epub:type="noteref">389</a> Apparently they think that to wash their plates would be to wash out the camphor crystals from the trees in which they are imbedded. In Laos, a province of Siam, a rhinoceros hunter will not wash himself for fear that as a consequence the wounds inflicted on the rhinoceros might not be mortal, and that the animal might disappear in one of the caves full of water in the mountains.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-390" id="noteref-1-1-390" epub:type="noteref">390</a> The chief product of some parts of Laos is lac. This is a resinous gum exuded by a red insect on the young branches of trees, to which the little creatures have to be attached by hand. All who engage in the business of gathering the gum abstain from washing themselves and especially from cleansing their heads, lest by removing the parasites from their hair they should detach the other insects from the boughs.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-391" id="noteref-1-1-391" epub:type="noteref">391</a> Some of the Brazilian Indians would never bring a slaughtered deer into their hut without first hamstringing it, believing that if they failed to do so, they and their children would never be able to run down their enemies.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-392" id="noteref-1-1-392" epub:type="noteref">392</a> Apparently they thought that by hamstringing the animal they at the same stroke deprived their foemen of the use of their legs. No Arikara Indian would break a marrow bone in a hut; for they think that were he to do so their horses would break their legs in the prairie.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-393" id="noteref-1-1-393" epub:type="noteref">393</a> Again, a Blackfoot Indian who has set a trap for eagles, and is watching it, would not eat rosebuds on any account; for he argues that if he did so, and an eagle alighted near the trap, the rosebuds in his own stomach would make the bird itch, with the result that instead of swallowing the bait the eagle would merely sit and scratch himself. Following this train of thought the eagle hunter also refrains from using an awl when he is looking after his snares; for surely if he were to scratch with an awl, the eagles would scratch him. The same disastrous consequence would follow if his wives and children at home used an awl while he is out after eagles, and accordingly they are forbidden to handle the tool in his absence for fear of putting him in bodily danger.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-394" id="noteref-1-1-394" epub:type="noteref">394</a></p>
					<p>All the foregoing taboos being based on the law of similarity may be called homoeopathic taboos. The Cholones, an Indian tribe of eastern Peru, make use of poisoned arrows in the chase, but there are some animals, such as armadillos, certain kinds of falcons, and a species of vulture, which they would on no account shoot at with these weapons. For they believe that between the poisoned arrows which they use and the supply of poison at home there exists a sympathetic relation of such a sort that if they shot at any of these creatures with poisoned shafts, all the poison at home would be spoilt, which would be a great loss to them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-395" id="noteref-1-1-395" epub:type="noteref">395</a> Here the exact train of thought is not clear; but we may suppose that the animals in question are believed to possess a power of counteracting and annulling the effect of the poison, and that consequently if they are touched by it, all the poison, including the store of it at home, would be robbed of its virtue. However that may be, it is plain that the superstition rests on the law of contact, on the notion, namely, that things which have once been in contact remain sympathetically in contact with each other always. The poison with which the hunter wounds an animal has once been in contact with the store of poison at home; hence if the poison in the wound loses its venom, so necessarily will all the poison at home. These may be called contagious taboos.</p>
					<p>Among the taboos observed by savages none perhaps are more numerous or important than the prohibitions to eat certain foods, and of such prohibitions many are demonstrably derived from the law of similarity and are accordingly examples of negative magic. Just as the savage eats many animals or plants in order to acquire certain desirable qualities with which he believes them to be endowed, so he avoids eating many other animals and plants lest he should acquire certain undesirable qualities with which he believes them to be infected. In eating the former he practises positive magic; in abstaining from the latter he practises negative magic. Many examples of such positive magic will meet us later on;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-396" id="noteref-1-1-396" epub:type="noteref">396</a> here I will give a few instances of such negative magic or taboo. For example, in Madagascar soldiers are forbidden to eat a number of foods lest on the principle of homoeopathic magic they should be tainted by certain dangerous or undesirable properties which are supposed to inhere in these particular viands. Thus they may not taste hedgehog, “as it is feared that this animal, from its propensity of coiling up into a ball when alarmed, will impart a timid shrinking disposition to those who partake of it.” Again, no soldier should eat an ox’s knee, lest like an ox he should become weak in the knees and unable to march. Further, the warrior should be careful to avoid partaking of a cock that has died fighting or anything that has been speared to death; and no male animal may on any account be killed in his house while he is away at the wars. For it seems obvious that if he were to eat a cock that had died fighting, he would himself be slain on the field of battle; if he were to partake of an animal that had been speared, he would be speared himself; if a male animal were killed in his house during his absence, he would himself be killed in like manner and perhaps at the same instant. Further, the Malagasy soldier must eschew kidneys, because in the Malagasy language the word for kidney is the same as that for “shot”; so shot he would certainly be if he ate a kidney.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-397" id="noteref-1-1-397" epub:type="noteref">397</a> Again, a Caffre has been known to refuse to eat two mice caught at the same time in one trap, alleging that were he to do so his wife would give birth to twins; yet the same man would eat freely of mice if they were caught singly.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-398" id="noteref-1-1-398" epub:type="noteref">398</a> Clearly he imagined that if he ate the two mice he would be infected with the virus of doublets and would communicate the infection to his wife. Amongst the Zulus there are many foods which are similarly forbidden on homoeopathic principles. It may be well to give some specimens of these prohibitions as they have been described by the Zulus themselves. “There is among the black men,” they say, “the custom of abstaining from certain foods. If a cow has the calf taken from her dead, and the mother too dies before the calf is taken away, young people who have never had a child abstain from the flesh of that cow. I do not mean to speak of girls; there is not even a thought of whether they can eat it; for it is said that the cow will produce a similar evil among the women, so that one of them will be like the cow when she is in childbirth, be unable to give birth, like the cow, and die together with her child. On this account, therefore, the flesh of such a cow is abstained from. Further, pig’s flesh is not eaten by girls on any account; for it is an ugly animal; its mouth is ugly, its snout is long; therefore girls do not eat it, thinking if they eat it, a resemblance to the pig will appear among their children. They abstain from it on that account. There are many things which are abstained from among black people through fear of bad resemblance; for it is said there was a person who once gave birth to an elephant, and a horse; but we do not know if that is true; but they are now abstained from on that account, through thinking that they will produce an evil resemblance if eaten; and the elephant is said to produce an evil resemblance, for when it is killed many parts of its body resemble those of a female; its breasts, for instance, are just like those of a woman. Young people, therefore, fear to eat it; it is only eaten on account of famine, when there is no food; and each of the young women say, ‘It is no matter if I do give birth to an elephant and live; that is better than not to give birth to it, and die of famine.’ So it is eaten from mere necessity. Another thing which is abstained from is the entrails of cattle. Men do not eat them, because they are afraid if they eat them, the enemy will stab them in the bowels. Young men do not eat them; they are eaten by old people. Another thing which is not eaten is the under lip of a bullock; for it is said, a young person must not eat it, for it will produce an evil resemblance in the child; the lip of the child will tremble continually, for the lower lip of a bullock moves constantly. They do not therefore eat it; for if a child of a young person is seen with its mouth trembling, it is said, ‘It was injured by its father, who ate the lower lip of a bullock.’ Also another thing which is abstained from is that portion of the paunch of a bullock which is called <i>umtala</i>; for the <i>umtala</i> has no <i>villi</i>, it has no pile; it is merely smooth and hard. It is therefore said, if it is eaten by young people, their children will be born without hair, and their heads will be bare like a man’s knee. It is therefore abstained from.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-399" id="noteref-1-1-399" epub:type="noteref">399</a></p>
					<p>The reader may have observed that in some of the foregoing examples of taboos the magical influence is supposed to operate at considerable distances; thus among the Blackfeet Indians the wives and children of an eagle hunter are forbidden to use an awl during his absence, lest the eagles should scratch the distant husband and father;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-400" id="noteref-1-1-400" epub:type="noteref">400</a> and again no male animal may be killed in the house of a Malagasy soldier while he is away at the wars, lest the killing of the animal should entail the killing of the man.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-401" id="noteref-1-1-401" epub:type="noteref">401</a> This belief in the sympathetic influence exerted on each other by persons or things at a distance is of the essence of magic. Whatever doubts science may entertain as to the possibility of action at a distance, magic has none; faith in telepathy is one of its first principles. A modern advocate of the influence of mind upon mind at a distance would have no difficulty in convincing a savage; the savage believed in it long ago, and what is more, he acted on his belief with a logical consistency such as his civilised brother in the faith has not yet, so far as I am aware, exhibited in his conduct. For the savage is convinced not only that magical ceremonies affect persons and things afar off, but that the simplest acts of daily life may do so too. Hence on important occasions the behaviour of friends and relations at a distance is often regulated by a more or less elaborate code of rules, the neglect of which by the one set of persons would, it is supposed, entail misfortune or even death on the absent ones. In particular when a party of men are out hunting or fighting, their kinsfolk at home are often expected to do certain things or to abstain from doing certain others, for the sake of ensuring the safety and success of the distant hunters or warriors. I will now give some instances of this magical telepathy both in its positive and in its negative aspect.</p>
					<p>In Laos when an elephant hunter is starting for the chase, he warns his wife not to cut her hair or oil her body in his absence; for if she cut her hair the elephant would burst the toils, if she oiled herself it would slip through them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-402" id="noteref-1-1-402" epub:type="noteref">402</a> When a Dyak village has turned out to hunt wild pigs in the jungle, the people who stay at home may not touch oil or water with their hands during the absence of their friends; for if they did so, the hunters would all be “butterfingered” and the prey would slip through their hands.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-403" id="noteref-1-1-403" epub:type="noteref">403</a> In setting out to look for the rare and precious eagle-wood on the mountains, Cham peasants enjoin their wives, whom they leave at home, not to scold or quarrel in their absence, for such domestic brawls would lead to their husbands being rent in pieces by bears and tigers.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-404" id="noteref-1-1-404" epub:type="noteref">404</a> A Hottentot woman whose husband is out hunting must do one of two things all the time he is away. Either she must light a fire and keep it burning till he comes back; or if she does not choose to do that, she must go to the water and continue to splash it about on the ground. When she is tired with throwing the water about, her place may be taken by her servant, but the exercise must in any case be kept up without cessation. To cease splashing the water or to let the fire out would be equally fatal to the husband’s prospect of a successful bag.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-405" id="noteref-1-1-405" epub:type="noteref">405</a> In Yule Island, Torres Straits, when the men are gone to fetch sago, a fire is lit and carefully kept burning the whole time of their absence; for the people believe that if it went out the voyagers would fare ill.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-406" id="noteref-1-1-406" epub:type="noteref">406</a> At the other end of the world the Lapps similarly object to extinguish a brand in water while any members of the family are out fishing, since to do so would spoil their luck.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-407" id="noteref-1-1-407" epub:type="noteref">407</a></p>
					<p>Among the Koniags of Alaska a traveller once observed a young woman lying wrapt in a bearskin in the corner of a hut. On asking whether she were ill, he learned that her husband was out whale-fishing, and that until his return she had to lie fasting in order to ensure a good catch.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-408" id="noteref-1-1-408" epub:type="noteref">408</a> Among the Eskimo of Alaska similar notions prevail. The women during the whaling season remain in comparative idleness, as it is considered not good for them to sew while the men are out in the boats. If during this period any garments should need to be repaired, the women must take them far back out of sight of the sea and mend them there in little tents in which just one person can sit. And while the crews are at sea no work should be done at home which would necessitate pounding or hewing or any kind of noise; and in the huts of men who are away in the boats no work of any kind whatever should be carried on.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-409" id="noteref-1-1-409" epub:type="noteref">409</a> When the Eskimo of Aivilik and Iglulik are away hunting on the ice, the bedding may not be raised up, because they think that to do so would cause the ice to crack and drift off, and so the men might be lost. And among these people in the winter, when the new moon appears, boys must run out of the snow-house, take a handful of snow, and put it into the kettle. It is believed that this helps the hunter to capture the seal and to bring it home.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-410" id="noteref-1-1-410" epub:type="noteref">410</a> When the Maidu Indians of California were engaged in driving deer into the snares which they had prepared for them, and which consisted of fences stretched from tree to tree, the women and children who were left behind in the village had to observe a variety of regulations. The women had to keep quiet and spend much of the time indoors, and children might not romp, shout, jump over things, kick, run, fall down, or throw stones. If these rules were broken, it was believed that the deer would become unmanageable and would jump the fence, so that the whole drive would be unsuccessful.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-411" id="noteref-1-1-411" epub:type="noteref">411</a></p>
					<p>While a Gilyak hunter is pursuing the game in the forest, his children at home are forbidden to make drawings on wood or on sand; for they fear that if the children did so, the paths in the forest would become as perplexed as the lines in the drawings, so that the hunter might lose his way and never return. A Russian political prisoner once taught some Gilyak children to read and write; but their parents forbade them to write when any of their fathers was away from home; for it seemed to them that writing was a peculiarly complicated form of drawing, and they stood aghast at the idea of the danger to which such a drawing would expose the hunters out in the wild woods.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-412" id="noteref-1-1-412" epub:type="noteref">412</a> Among the Jukagirs of northeastern Siberia, when a young man is out hunting, his unmarried sister at home may not look at his footprints nor eat certain parts of the game killed by him. If she leaves the house while he is absent at the chase, she must keep her eyes fixed on the ground, and may not speak of the chase nor ask any questions about it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-413" id="noteref-1-1-413" epub:type="noteref">413</a> When a Nuba of northeastern Africa goes to El Obeid for the first time, he tells his wife not to wash or oil herself and not to wear pearls round her neck during his absence, because by doing so she would draw down on him the most terrible misfortunes.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-414" id="noteref-1-1-414" epub:type="noteref">414</a> When Bushmen are out hunting, any bad shots they may make are set down to such causes as that the children at home are playing on the men’s beds or the like, and the wives who allow such things to happen are blamed for their husbands’ indifferent marksmanship.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-415" id="noteref-1-1-415" epub:type="noteref">415</a></p>
					<p>Elephant-hunters in East Africa believe that, if their wives prove unfaithful in their absence, this gives the elephant power over his pursuer, who will accordingly be killed or severely wounded. Hence if a hunter hears of his wife’s misconduct, he abandons the chase and returns home.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-416" id="noteref-1-1-416" epub:type="noteref">416</a> If a Wagogo hunter is unsuccessful, or is attacked by a lion, he attributes it to his wife’s misbehaviour at home, and returns to her in great wrath. While he is away hunting, she may not let anyone pass behind her or stand in front of her as she sits; and she must lie on her face in bed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-417" id="noteref-1-1-417" epub:type="noteref">417</a> The Moxos Indians of eastern Bolivia thought that if a hunter’s wife was unfaithful to him in his absence he would be bitten by a serpent or a jaguar. Accordingly, if such an accident happened to him, it was sure to entail the punishment, and often the death, of the woman, whether she was innocent or guilty.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-418" id="noteref-1-1-418" epub:type="noteref">418</a> An Aleutian hunter of sea-otters thinks that he cannot kill a single animal if during his absence from home his wife should be unfaithful or his sister unchaste.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-419" id="noteref-1-1-419" epub:type="noteref">419</a></p>
					<p>The Huichol Indians of Mexico treat as a demigod a species of cactus which throws the eater into a state of ecstasy. The plant does not grow in their country, and has to be fetched every year by men who make a journey of forty-three days for the purpose. Meanwhile the wives at home contribute to the safety of their absent husbands by never walking fast, much less running, while the men are on the road. They also do their best to ensure the benefits which, in the shape of rain, good crops, and so forth, are expected to flow from the sacred mission. With this intention they subject themselves to severe restrictions like those imposed upon their husbands. During the whole of the time which elapses till the festival of the cactus is held, neither party washes except on certain occasions, and then only with water brought from the distant country where the holy plant grows. They also fast much, eat no salt, and are bound to strict continence. Anyone who breaks this law is punished with illness, and, moreover, jeopardises the result which all are striving for. Health, luck, and life are to be gained by gathering the cactus, the gourd of the God of Fire; but inasmuch as the pure fire cannot benefit the impure, men and women must not only remain chaste for the time being, but must also purge themselves from the taint of past sin. Hence four days after the men have started the women gather and confess to Grandfather Fire with what men they have been in love from childhood till now. They may not omit a single one, for if they did so the men would not find a single cactus. So to refresh their memories each one prepares a string with as many knots as she has had lovers. This she brings to the temple, and, standing before the fire, she mentions aloud all the men she has scored on her string, name after name. Having ended her confession, she throws the string into the fire, and when the god has consumed it in his pure flame, her sins are forgiven her and she departs in peace. From now on the women are averse even to letting men pass near them. The cactus-seekers themselves make in like manner a clean breast of all their frailties. For every peccadillo they tie a knot on a string, and after they have “talked to all the five winds” they deliver the rosary of their sins to the leader, who burns it in the fire.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-420" id="noteref-1-1-420" epub:type="noteref">420</a></p>
					<p>Many of the indigenous tribes of Sarawak are firmly persuaded that were the wives to commit adultery while their husbands are searching for camphor in the jungle, the camphor obtained by the men would evaporate.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-421" id="noteref-1-1-421" epub:type="noteref">421</a> Husbands can discover, by certain knots in the tree, when their wives are unfaithful; and it is said that in former days many women were killed by jealous husbands on no better evidence than that of these knots. Further, the wives dare not touch a comb while their husbands are away collecting the camphor; for if they did so, the interstices between the fibres of the tree, instead of being filled with the precious crystals, would be empty like the spaces between the teeth of a comb.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-422" id="noteref-1-1-422" epub:type="noteref">422</a> While men of the Toaripi or Motumotu tribe of eastern New Guinea are away hunting, fishing, fighting, or on any long journey, the people who remain at home must observe strict chastity, and may not let the fire go out. Those of them who stay in the men’s clubhouses must further abstain from eating certain foods and from touching anything that belongs to others. A breach of these rules might, it is believed, entail the failure of the expedition.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-423" id="noteref-1-1-423" epub:type="noteref">423</a> Among the tribes of Geelvink Bay, in northwestern New Guinea, when the men are gone on a long journey, as to Ceram or Tidore, the wives and sisters left at home sing to the moon, accompanying the lay with the booming music of gongs. The singing takes place in the afternoons, beginning two or three days before the new moon, and lasting for the same time after it. If the silver sickle of the moon is seen in the sky, they raise a loud cry of joy. Asked why they do so, they answer, “Now we see the moon, and so do our husbands, and now we know that they are well; if we did not sing, they would be sick or some other misfortune would befall them.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-424" id="noteref-1-1-424" epub:type="noteref">424</a> On nights when the moon is at the full the natives of Doreh, in northwestern New Guinea, go out fishing on the lagoons. Their mode of proceeding is to poison the water with the pounded roots of a certain plant which has a powerful narcotic effect; the fish are stunned by it, and so easily caught. While the men are at work on the moonlit water, the people on the shore must keep as still as death with their eyes fixed on the fishermen; but no woman with child may be among them, for if she were there and looked at the water, the poison would at once lose its effect and the fish would escape.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-425" id="noteref-1-1-425" epub:type="noteref">425</a> In the Kei Islands, to the southwest of New Guinea, as soon as a vessel that is about to sail for a distant port has been launched, the part of the beach on which it lay is covered as speedily as possible with palm branches, and becomes sacred. No one may thenceforth cross that spot till the ship comes home. To cross it sooner would cause the vessel to perish.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-426" id="noteref-1-1-426" epub:type="noteref">426</a> Moreover, all the time that the voyage lasts three or four young girls, specially chosen for the duty, are supposed to remain in sympathetic connection with the mariners and to contribute by their behaviour to the safety and success of the voyage. On no account, except for the most necessary purpose, may they quit the room that has been assigned to them. More than that, so long as the vessel is believed to be at sea they must remain absolutely motionless, crouched on their mats with their hands clasped between their knees. They may not turn their heads to the left or to the right or make any other movement whatsoever. If they did, it would cause the boat to pitch and toss; and they may not eat any sticky stuff, such as rice boiled in coconut milk, for the stickiness of the food would clog the passage of the boat through the water. When the sailors are supposed to have reached their destination, the strictness of these rules is somewhat relaxed; but during the whole time that the voyage lasts the girls are forbidden to eat fish which have sharp bones or stings, such as the stingray, lest their friends at sea should be involved in sharp, stinging trouble.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-427" id="noteref-1-1-427" epub:type="noteref">427</a></p>
					<p>Where beliefs like these prevail as to the sympathetic connection between friends at a distance, we need not wonder that above everything else war, with its stern yet stirring appeal to some of the deepest and tenderest of human emotions, should quicken in the anxious relations left behind a desire to turn the sympathetic bond to the utmost account for the benefit of the dear ones who may at any moment be fighting and dying far away. Hence, to secure an end so natural and laudable, friends at home are apt to resort to devices which will strike us as pathetic or ludicrous, according as we consider their object or the means adopted to effect it. Thus in some districts of Borneo, when a Dyak is out head-hunting, his wife or, if he is unmarried, his sister must wear a sword day and night in order that he may always be thinking of his weapons; and she may not sleep during the day nor go to bed before two in the morning, lest her husband or brother should thereby be surprised in his sleep by an enemy.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-428" id="noteref-1-1-428" epub:type="noteref">428</a> In other parts of Borneo, when the men are away on a warlike expedition, their mats are spread in their houses just as if they were at home, and the fires are kept up till late in the evening and lighted again before dawn, in order that the men may not be cold. Further, the roofing of the house is opened before daylight to prevent the distant husbands, brothers, and sons from sleeping too late, and so being surprised by the enemy.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-429" id="noteref-1-1-429" epub:type="noteref">429</a> While a Malay of the Peninsula is away at the wars, his pillows and sleeping-mat at home must be kept rolled up. If anyone else were to use them, the absent warrior’s courage would fail and disaster would befall him. His wife and children may not have their hair cut in his absence, nor may he himself have his hair shorn.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-430" id="noteref-1-1-430" epub:type="noteref">430</a></p>
					<p>Among the Sea Dyaks of Banting in Sarawak the women strictly observe an elaborate code of rules while the men are away fighting. Some of the rules are negative and some are positive, but all alike are based on the principles of magical homoeopathy and telepathy. Amongst them are the following. The women must wake very early in the morning and open the windows as soon as it is light; otherwise their absent husbands will oversleep themselves. The women may not oil their hair, or the men will slip. The women may neither sleep nor doze by day, or the men will be drowsy on the march. The women must cook and scatter popcorn on the verandah every morning; so will the men be agile in their movements. The rooms must be kept very tidy, all boxes being placed near the walls; for if anyone were to stumble over them, the absent husbands would fall and be at the mercy of the foe. At every meal a little rice must be left in the pot and put aside; so will the men far away always have something to eat and need never go hungry. On no account may the women sit at the loom till their legs grow cramped, otherwise their husbands will likewise be stiff in their joints and unable to rise up quickly or to run away from the foe. So in order to keep their husband’s joints supple the women often vary their labours at the loom by walking up and down the verandah. Further, they may not cover up their faces, or the men would not be able to find their way through the tall grass or jungle. Again, the women may not sew with a needle, or the men will tread on the sharp spikes set by the enemy in the path. Should a wife prove unfaithful while her husband is away, he will lose his life in the enemy’s country. Some years ago all these rules and more were observed by the women of Banting, while their husbands were fighting for the English against rebels. But alas! these tender precautions availed them little; for many a man, whose faithful wife was keeping watch and ward for him at home, found a soldier’s grave.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-431" id="noteref-1-1-431" epub:type="noteref">431</a></p>
					<p>Among the Shans of Burma the wife of an absent warrior has to observe certain rules. Every fifth day she rests and does no work. She fills an earthen goblet with water to the brim and puts flowers into it every day. If the water sinks or the flowers fade, it is an omen of death. Moreover, she may not sleep on her husband’s bed during his absence, but she sweeps the bedding clean and lays it out every night.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-432" id="noteref-1-1-432" epub:type="noteref">432</a> In the island of Timor, while war is being waged, the high-priest never quits the temple; his food is brought to him or cooked inside; day and night he must keep the fire burning, for if he were to let it die out, disaster would befall the warriors and would continue so long as the hearth was cold. Moreover, he must drink only hot water during the time the army is absent; for every draught of cold water would damp the spirits of the people, so that they could not vanquish the enemy.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-433" id="noteref-1-1-433" epub:type="noteref">433</a> Among the Toradjas of Central Celebes, when a party of men is out hunting for heads, the villagers who stay at home, and especially the wives of the headhunters, have to observe certain rules in order not to hinder the absent men at their task. In the first place, the entrance to the <i>lobo</i> or spirit-house is shut. For the spirits of their fathers, who live in that house, are now away with the warriors, watching over and guarding them; and if anyone entered their house in their absence they would hear the noise and return and be very angry at being thus called back from the campaign. Moreover, the people at home have to keep the house tidy: the sleeping-mats of the absent men must be hung on beams, not rolled up as if they were to be away a long time: their wives and next-of-kin may not quit the house at night: every night a light burns in the house, and a fire must be kept up constantly at the foot of the house-ladder: garments, turbans, and headdresses may not be laid aside at night, for if the turban or headdress were put off the warrior’s turban might drop from his head in the battle; and the wives may sew no garments. When the spirit of the headhunter returns home in his sleep (which is the Toradja expression for a soldier’s dream) he must find everything there in good order and nothing that could vex him. By the observance of these rules, say the Toradjas, the souls of the headhunters are “covered” or protected. And in order to make them strong, that they may not soon grow weary, rice is strewed morning and evening on the floor of the house. The women too go about constantly with a certain plant of which the pods are so light and feathery that they are easily wafted by the wind, for that helps to make the men nimble-footed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-434" id="noteref-1-1-434" epub:type="noteref">434</a></p>
					<p>When Galelareese men are going away to war, they are accompanied down to the boats by the women. But after the leave-taking is over, the women, in returning to their houses, must be careful not to stumble or fall, and in the house they may neither be angry nor lift up weapons against each other; otherwise the men will fall and be killed in battle.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-435" id="noteref-1-1-435" epub:type="noteref">435</a> Similarly, we saw that among the Chams domestic brawls at home are supposed to cause the searcher for eagle-wood to fall a prey to wild beasts on the mountains.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-436" id="noteref-1-1-436" epub:type="noteref">436</a> Further, Galelareese women may not lay down the chopping knives in the house while their husbands are at the wars; the knives must always be hung up on hooks.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-437" id="noteref-1-1-437" epub:type="noteref">437</a> The reason for the rule is not given; we may conjecture that it is a fear lest, if the chopping knives were laid down by the women at home, the men would be apt to lay down their weapons in the battle or at other inopportune moments. In the Kei Islands, when the warriors have departed, the women return indoors and bring out certain baskets containing fruits and stones. These fruits and stones they anoint and place on a board, murmuring as they do so, “O lord sun, moon, let the bullets rebound from our husbands, brothers, betrothed, and other relations, just as raindrops rebound from these objects which are smeared with oil.” As soon as the first shot is heard, the baskets are put aside, and the women, seizing their fans, rush out of the houses. Then, waving their fans in the direction of the enemy, they run through the village, while they sing, “O golden fans! let our bullets hit, and those of the enemy miss.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-438" id="noteref-1-1-438" epub:type="noteref">438</a> In this custom the ceremony of anointing stones, in order that the bullets may recoil from the men like raindrops from the stones, is a piece of pure homoeopathic or imitative magic; but the prayer to the sun, that he will be pleased to give effect to the charm, is a religious and perhaps later addition. The waving of the fans seems to be a charm to direct the bullets towards or away from their mark, according as they are discharged from the guns of friends or foes.</p>
					<p>An old historian of Madagascar informs us that “while the men are at the wars, and until their return, the women and girls cease not day and night to dance, and neither lie down nor take food in their own houses. And although they are very voluptuously inclined, they would not for anything in the world have an intrigue with another man while their husband is at the war, believing firmly that if that happened, their husband would be either killed or wounded. They believe that by dancing they impart strength, courage, and good fortune to their husbands; accordingly during such times they give themselves no rest, and this custom they observe very religiously.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-439" id="noteref-1-1-439" epub:type="noteref">439</a> Similarly a traveller of the seventeenth century writes that in Madagascar “when the man is in battle or under march, the wife continually dances and sings, and will not sleep or eat in her own house, nor admit of the use of any other man, unless she be desirous to be rid of her own; for they entertain this opinion among them, that if they suffer themselves to be overcome in an <i>intestin war</i> at home, their husbands must suffer for it, being ingaged in a <i>forreign expedition</i>; but, on the contrary, if they behave themselves chastely, and dance lustily, that then their husbands, by some certain sympathetical operation, will be able to vanquish all their combatants.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-440" id="noteref-1-1-440" epub:type="noteref">440</a> We have seen that among hunters in various parts of the world the infidelity of the wife at home is believed to have a disastrous effect on her absent husband. In the Babar Archipelago, and among the Wagogo of East Africa, when the men are at the wars the women at home are bound to chastity, and in the Babar Archipelago they must fast besides.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-441" id="noteref-1-1-441" epub:type="noteref">441</a> Under similar circumstances in the islands of Leti, Moa, and Lakor the women and children are forbidden to remain inside of the houses and to twine thread or weave.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-442" id="noteref-1-1-442" epub:type="noteref">442</a></p>
					<p>Among the Tshi-speaking peoples of the Gold Coast the wives of men who are away with the army paint themselves white, and adorn their persons with beads and charms. On the day when a battle is expected to take place, they run about armed with guns, or sticks carved to look like guns, and taking green pawpaws (fruits shaped somewhat like a melon), they hack them with knives, as if they were chopping off the heads of the foe.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-443" id="noteref-1-1-443" epub:type="noteref">443</a> The pantomime is no doubt merely an imitative charm, to enable the men to do to the enemy as the women do to the pawpaws. In the West African town of Framin, while the Ashantee war was raging some years ago, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fitzgerald Marriott saw a dance performed by women whose husbands had gone as carriers to the war. They were painted white and wore nothing but a short petticoat. At their head was a shrivelled old sorceress in a very short white petticoat, her black hair arranged in a sort of long projecting horn, and her black face, breasts, arms, and legs profusely adorned with white circles and crescents. All carried long white brushes made of buffalo or horse tails, and as they danced they sang, “Our husbands have gone to Ashanteeland; may they sweep their enemies off the face of the earth!”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-444" id="noteref-1-1-444" epub:type="noteref">444</a> Among the Thompson Indians of British Columbia, when the men were on the warpath, the women performed dances at frequent intervals. These dances were believed to ensure the success of the expedition. The dancers flourished their knives, threw long sharp-pointed sticks forward, or drew sticks with hooked ends repeatedly backward and forward. Throwing the sticks forward was symbolic of piercing or warding off the enemy, and drawing them back was symbolic of drawing their own men from danger. The hook at the end of the stick was particularly well adapted to serve the purpose of a lifesaving apparatus. The women always pointed their weapons towards the enemy’s country. They painted their faces red and sang as they danced, and they prayed to the weapons to preserve their husbands and help them to kill many foes. Some had eagle-down stuck on the points of their sticks. When the dance was over, these weapons were hidden. If a woman whose husband was at the war thought she saw hair or a piece of a scalp on the weapon when she took it out, she knew that her husband had killed an enemy. But if she saw a stain of blood on it, she knew he was wounded or dead.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-445" id="noteref-1-1-445" epub:type="noteref">445</a> When the men of the Yuki tribe of Indians in California were away fighting, the women at home did not sleep; they danced continually in a circle, chanting and waving leafy wands. For they said that if they danced all the time, their husbands would not grow tired.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-446" id="noteref-1-1-446" epub:type="noteref">446</a> Among the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands, when the men had gone to war, the women at home would get up very early in the morning and pretend to make war by falling upon their children and feigning to take them for slaves. This was supposed to help their husbands to go and do likewise. If a wife were unfaithful to her husband while he was away on the warpath, he would probably be killed. For ten nights all the women at home lay with their heads towards the point of the compass to which the war-canoes had paddled away. Then they changed about, for the warriors were supposed to be coming home across the sea. At Masset the Haida women danced and sang war-songs all the time their husbands were away at the wars, and they had to keep everything about them in a certain order. It was thought that a wife might kill her husband by not observing these customs.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-447" id="noteref-1-1-447" epub:type="noteref">447</a> In the Kafir district of the Hindu Koosh, while the men are out raiding, the women abandon their work in the fields and assemble in the villages to dance day and night. The dances are kept up most of each day and the whole of each night. Sir George Robertson, who reports the custom, more than once watched the dancers dancing at midnight and in the early morning, and could see by the fitful glow of the woodfire how haggard and tired they looked, yet how gravely and earnestly they persisted in what they regarded as a serious duty.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-448" id="noteref-1-1-448" epub:type="noteref">448</a> The dances of these Kafirs are said to be performed in honour of certain of the national gods, but when we consider the custom in connection with the others which have just been passed in review, we may reasonably surmise that it is or was originally in its essence a sympathetic charm intended to keep the absent warriors wakeful, lest they should be surprised in their sleep by the enemy. When a band of Carib Indians of the Orinoco had gone on the warpath, their friends left in the village used to calculate as nearly as they could the exact moment when the absent warriors would be advancing to attack the enemy. Then they took two lads, laid them down on a bench, and inflicted a most severe scourging on their bare backs. This the youths submitted to without a murmur, supported in their sufferings by the firm conviction, in which they had been bred from childhood, that on the constancy and fortitude with which they bore the cruel ordeal depended the valour and success of their comrades in the battle.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-449" id="noteref-1-1-449" epub:type="noteref">449</a></p>
					<p>So much for the savage theory of telepathy in war and the chase. We pass now to other cases of homoeopathic or imitative magic. While marriageable boys of the Mekeo district in British New Guinea are making their drums, they have to live alone in the forest and to observe a number of rules which are based on the principle of homoeopathic magic. The drums will be used in the dances, and in order that they may give out a resonant sonorous note, great care must be taken in their construction. The boys may spend from two days to a week at the task. Having chosen a suitable piece of wood, they scrape the outside into shape with a shell, and hollow out the inside by burning it with a hot coal till the sides are very thin. The skin of an iguana, made supple by being steeped in coconut milk, is then stretched over the hollow and tightened with string and glue. All the time a boy is at work on his drum, he must carefully avoid women; for if a woman or a girl were to see him, the drum would split and sound like an old cracked pot. If he ate fish, a bone would prick him and the skin of the drum would burst. If he ate a red banana it would choke him, and the drum would give a dull stifled note; if he tasted grated coconut, the white ants, like the white particles of the nut, would gnaw the body of the drum; if he cooked his food in the ordinary round-bellied pot, he would grow fat and would not be able to dance, and the girls would despise him and say, “Your belly is big; it is a pot!” Moreover, he must strictly shun water; for if he accidentally touched it with his feet, his hands, or his lips before the drum was quite hollowed out, he would throw the instrument away, saying: “I have touched water; my hot coal will be put out, and I shall never be able to hollow out my drum.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-450" id="noteref-1-1-450" epub:type="noteref">450</a> A Highland witch can sink a ship by homoeopathic or imitative magic. She has only to set a small round dish floating in a milk-pan full of water, and then to croon her spell. When the dish upsets in the pan, the ship will go down in the sea. They say that once three witches from Harris left home at night after placing the milk-pan thus on the floor, and strictly charging a serving-maid to let nothing come near it. But while the girl was not looking a duck came in and squattered about in the water on the floor. Next morning the witches returned and asked if anything had come near the pan. The girl said “No,” whereupon one of the witches said to the others, “What a heavy sea we had last night coming round Cabag head!”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-451" id="noteref-1-1-451" epub:type="noteref">451</a> If a wolf has carried off a sheep or a pig, the Estonians have a very simple mode of making him drop it. They let fall anything that they happen to have at hand, such as a cap or a glove, or, what is perhaps still better, they lift a heavy stone and then let it go. By that act, on the principle of homoeopathic magic, they compel the wolf to let go his booty.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-452" id="noteref-1-1-452" epub:type="noteref">452</a></p>
					<p>Among the many beneficent uses to which a mistaken ingenuity has applied the principle of homoeopathic or imitative magic, is that of causing trees and plants to bear fruit in due season. In Thüringen the man who sows flax carries the seed in a long bag which reaches from his shoulders to his knees, and he walks with long strides, so that the bag sways to and fro on his back. It is believed that this will cause the flax to wave in the wind.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-453" id="noteref-1-1-453" epub:type="noteref">453</a> In the interior of Sumatra rice is sown by women who, in sowing, let their hair hang loose down their back, in order that the rice may grow luxuriantly and have long stalks.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-454" id="noteref-1-1-454" epub:type="noteref">454</a> Similarly, in ancient Mexico a festival was held in honour of the goddess of maize, or “the long-haired mother,” as she was called. It began at the time “when the plant had attained its full growth, and fibres shooting forth from the top of the green ear indicated that the grain was fully formed. During this festival the women wore their long hair unbound, shaking and tossing it in the dances which were the chief feature in the ceremonial, in order that the tassel of the maize might grow in like profusion, that the grain might be correspondingly large and flat, and that the people might have abundance.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-455" id="noteref-1-1-455" epub:type="noteref">455</a> It is a Malay maxim to plant maize when your stomach is full, and to see to it that your dibble is thick; for this will swell the ear of the maize.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-456" id="noteref-1-1-456" epub:type="noteref">456</a> And they say that you should sow rice also with a full stomach, for then the ears will be full.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-457" id="noteref-1-1-457" epub:type="noteref">457</a> The eminent novelist, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Hardy, was once told that the reason why certain trees in front of his house, near Weymouth, did not thrive, was that he looked at them before breakfast on an empty stomach.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-458" id="noteref-1-1-458" epub:type="noteref">458</a> More elaborate still are the measures taken by an Estonian peasant woman to make her cabbages thrive. On the day when they are sown she bakes great pancakes, in order that the cabbages may have great broad leaves; and she wears a dazzling white hood in the belief that this will cause the cabbages to have fine white heads. Moreover, as soon as the cabbages are transplanted, a small round stone is wrapt up tightly in a white linen rag and set at the end of the cabbage bed, because in this way the cabbage heads will grow very white and firm.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-459" id="noteref-1-1-459" epub:type="noteref">459</a> Among the Huzuls of the Carpathians, when a woman is planting cabbages, she winds many cloths about her head, in order that the heads of the cabbages may also be thick. And as soon as she has sown parsley, she grasps the calf of her leg with both hands, saying, “May it be as thick as that!”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-460" id="noteref-1-1-460" epub:type="noteref">460</a> Among the Kurs of East Prussia, who inhabit the long sandy tongue of land known as the Nehrung which parts the Baltic from a lagoon, when a farmer sows his fields in spring, he carries an axe and chops the earth with it, in order that the cornstalks may be so sturdy that an axe will be needed to hew them down.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-461" id="noteref-1-1-461" epub:type="noteref">461</a> For much the same reason a Bavarian sower in sowing wheat will sometimes wear a golden ring, in order that the corn may have a fine yellow colour.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-462" id="noteref-1-1-462" epub:type="noteref">462</a> The Malagasy think that only people with a good even set of teeth should plant maize, for otherwise there will be empty spaces in the maize cob corresponding to the empty spaces in the planter’s teeth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-463" id="noteref-1-1-463" epub:type="noteref">463</a></p>
					<p>In many parts of Europe dancing or leaping high in the air are approved homoeopathic modes of making the crops grow high. Thus in Franche-Comté they say that you should dance at the Carnival in order to make the hemp grow tall.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-464" id="noteref-1-1-464" epub:type="noteref">464</a> In the Vosges mountains the sower of hemp pulls his nether garments up as far as he can, because he imagines that the hemp he is sowing will attain the precise height to which he has succeeded in hitching up his breeches;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-465" id="noteref-1-1-465" epub:type="noteref">465</a> and in the same region another way of ensuring a good crop of hemp is to dance on the roof of the house on Twelfth Day.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-466" id="noteref-1-1-466" epub:type="noteref">466</a> In Swabia and among the Transylvanian Saxons it is a common custom for a man who has sown hemp to leap high on the field, in the belief that this will make the hemp grow tall.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-467" id="noteref-1-1-467" epub:type="noteref">467</a> All over Baden till recently it was the custom for the farmer’s wife to give the sower a dish of eggs or a cake baked with eggs either before or after sowing, in order that he might leap as high as possible. This was deemed the best way of making the hemp grow high. For the same purpose some people who had sown hemp used to dance the hemp dance, as it was called, on Shrove Tuesday, and in this dance also the dancers jumped as high as they could. In some parts of Baden the hemp seed is thrown in the air as high as possible, and in Katzenthal the urchins leap over fires in order that the hemp may grow tall.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-468" id="noteref-1-1-468" epub:type="noteref">468</a> Similarly in many other parts of Germany and Austria the peasant imagines that he makes the flax grow tall by dancing or leaping high, or by jumping backwards from a table; the higher the leap the taller will the flax be that year. The special season for thus promoting the growth of flax is Shrove Tuesday, but in some places it is Candlemas or Walpurgis Night (the eve of May Day). The scene of the performance is the flax field, the farmhouse, or the village tavern.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-469" id="noteref-1-1-469" epub:type="noteref">469</a> In some parts of Eastern Prussia the girls dance one by one in a large hoop at midnight on Shrove Tuesday. The hoop is adorned with leaves, flowers, and ribbons, and attached to it are a small bell and some flax. Strictly speaking, the hoop should be wrapt in white linen handkerchiefs, but the place of these is often taken by many-coloured bits of cloth, wool, and so forth. While dancing within the hoop each girl has to wave her arms vigorously and cry “Flax grow!” or words to that effect. When she has done, she leaps out of the hoop, or is lifted out of it by her partner.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-470" id="noteref-1-1-470" epub:type="noteref">470</a> In Anhalt, when the sower had sown the flax, he leaped up and flung the seed-bag high in the air, saying, “Grow and turn green! You have nothing else to do.” He hoped that the flax would grow as high as he flung the seed-bag in the air. At Quellendorff, in Anhalt, the first bushel of seed-corn had to be heaped up high in order that the cornstalks should grow tall and bear plenty of grain.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-471" id="noteref-1-1-471" epub:type="noteref">471</a> When Macedonian farmers have done digging their fields, they throw their spades up into the air, and catching them again, exclaim, “May the crop grow as high as the spade has gone!”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-472" id="noteref-1-1-472" epub:type="noteref">472</a></p>
					<p>The notion that a person can influence a plant homoeopathically by his act or condition comes out clearly in a remark made by a Malay woman. Being asked why she stripped the upper part of her body naked in reaping the rice, she explained that she did it to make the rice-husks thinner, as she was tired of pounding thick-husked rice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-473" id="noteref-1-1-473" epub:type="noteref">473</a> Clearly, she thought that the less clothing she wore the less husk there would be on the rice. Among the Minangkabauers of Sumatra, when a rice barn has been built a feast is held, of which a woman far advanced in pregnancy must partake. Her condition will obviously help the rice to be fruitful and multiply.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-474" id="noteref-1-1-474" epub:type="noteref">474</a> Among the Zulus a pregnant woman sometimes grinds corn, which is afterwards burnt among the half-grown crops in order to fertilise them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-475" id="noteref-1-1-475" epub:type="noteref">475</a> For a similar reason in Syria when a fruit-tree does not bear, the gardener gets a pregnant woman to fasten a stone to one of its branches; then the tree will be sure to bear fruit, but the woman will run a risk of miscarriage,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-476" id="noteref-1-1-476" epub:type="noteref">476</a> having transferred her fertility, or part of it, to the tree. The practice of loading with stones a tree which casts its fruit is mentioned by Maimonides,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-477" id="noteref-1-1-477" epub:type="noteref">477</a> though the Rabbis apparently did not understand it. The proceeding was most probably a homoeopathic charm designed to load the tree with fruit.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-478" id="noteref-1-1-478" epub:type="noteref">478</a> In Swabia they say that if a fruit-tree does not bear, you should keep it loaded with a heavy stone all summer, and next year it will be sure to bear.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-479" id="noteref-1-1-479" epub:type="noteref">479</a> The custom of tying stones to fruit-trees in order to ensure a crop of fruit is followed also in Sicily.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-480" id="noteref-1-1-480" epub:type="noteref">480</a> The magic virtue of a pregnant woman to communicate fertility is known to Bavarian and Austrian peasants, who think that if you give the first fruit of a tree to a woman with child to eat, the tree will bring forth abundantly next year.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-481" id="noteref-1-1-481" epub:type="noteref">481</a> In Bohemia for a similar purpose the first apple of a young tree is sometimes plucked and eaten by a woman who has borne many children, for then the tree will be sure to bear many apples.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-482" id="noteref-1-1-482" epub:type="noteref">482</a> In the Zürcher Oberland, Switzerland, they think that a cherry-tree will bear abundantly if its first fruit is eaten by a woman who has just given birth to her first child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-483" id="noteref-1-1-483" epub:type="noteref">483</a> In Macedonia the first fruit of a tree should not be eaten by a barren woman but by one who has many children.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-484" id="noteref-1-1-484" epub:type="noteref">484</a> The Nicobar Islanders think it lucky to get a pregnant woman and her husband to plant seed in gardens.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-485" id="noteref-1-1-485" epub:type="noteref">485</a> The Greeks and Romans sacrificed pregnant victims to the goddesses of the corn and of the earth, doubtless in order that the earth might teem and the corn swell in the ear.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-486" id="noteref-1-1-486" epub:type="noteref">486</a> When a Catholic priest remonstrated with the Indians of the Orinoco on allowing their women to sow the fields in the blazing sun, with infants at their breasts, the men answered, “Father, you don’t understand these things, and that is why they vex you. You know that women are accustomed to bear children, and that we men are not. When the women sow, the stalk of the maize bears two or three ears, the root of the yucca yields two or three basketfuls, and everything multiplies in proportion. Now why is that? Simply because the women know how to bring forth, and know how to make the seed which they sow bring forth also. Let them sow, then; we men don’t know as much about it as they do.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-487" id="noteref-1-1-487" epub:type="noteref">487</a> For the same reason, probably, the Tupinambas of Brazil thought that if a certain earth-almond were planted by the men, it would not grow.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-488" id="noteref-1-1-488" epub:type="noteref">488</a> Among the Ilocans of Luzon the men sow bananas, but the sower must have a young child on his shoulder, or the bananas will bear no fruit.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-489" id="noteref-1-1-489" epub:type="noteref">489</a> When a tree bears no fruit, the Galelareese think it is a male; and their remedy is simple. They put a woman’s petticoat on the tree, which, being thus converted into a female, will naturally prove prolific.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-490" id="noteref-1-1-490" epub:type="noteref">490</a> On the other hand the Baganda believe that a barren wife infects her husband’s garden with her own sterility and prevents the trees from bearing fruit; hence a childless woman is generally divorced.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-491" id="noteref-1-1-491" epub:type="noteref">491</a> For a like reason, probably, the Wajagga of East Africa throw away the corpse of a childless woman, with all her belongings, in the forest or in any other place where the land is never cultivated; moreover her body is not carried out of the door of the hut, but a special passage is broken for it through the wall,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-492" id="noteref-1-1-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a> no doubt to prevent her dangerous ghost from finding its way back.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-493" id="noteref-1-1-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a></p>
					<p>Thus on the theory of homoeopathic magic a person can influence vegetation either for good or for evil according to the good or the bad character of his acts or states: for example, a fruitful woman makes plants fruitful, a barren woman makes them barren. Hence this belief in the noxious and infectious nature of certain personal qualities or accidents has given rise to a number of prohibitions or rules of avoidance: people abstain from doing certain things lest they should homoeopathically infect the fruits of the earth with their own undesirable state or condition. All such customs of abstention or rules of avoidance are examples of negative magic or taboo.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-494" id="noteref-1-1-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a> Thus, for example, arguing from what may be called the infectiousness of personal acts or states, the Galelareese say that you ought not to shoot with a bow and arrows under a fruit-tree, or the tree will cast its fruit even as the arrows fall to the ground;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-495" id="noteref-1-1-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a> and that when you are eating watermelon you ought not to mix the pips which you spit out of your mouth with the pips which you have put aside to serve as seed; for if you do, though the pips you spat out may certainly spring up and blossom, yet the blossoms will keep falling off just as the pips fell from your mouth, and thus these pips will never bear fruit.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-496" id="noteref-1-1-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a> Precisely the same train of thought leads the Bavarian peasant to believe that if he allows the graft of a fruit-tree to fall on the ground, the tree that springs from that graft will let its fruit fall untimely.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-497" id="noteref-1-1-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a> The Indians of Santiago Tepehuacan suppose that if a single grain of the maize which they are about to sow were eaten by an animal, the birds and the wild boars would come and devour all the rest, and nothing would grow. And if any of these Indians has ever in his life buried a corpse, he will never be allowed to plant a fruit-tree, for they say that the tree would wither. And they will not let such a man go fishing with them, for the fish would flee from him.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-498" id="noteref-1-1-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a> Clearly these Indians imagine that anybody who has buried a corpse is thereby tainted, so to say, with an infection of death, which might prove fatal to fruits and fish. In Nias, the day after a man has made preparations for planting rice he may not use fire, or the crop would be parched; he may not spread his mats on the ground, or the young plants would droop towards the earth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-499" id="noteref-1-1-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a> When the Chams of Cochinchina are sowing their dry rice-fields and desire that no rain should fall, they eat their rice dry instead of moistening it, as they usually do, with the water in which vegetables and fish have been boiled. That prevents rain from spoiling the rice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-500" id="noteref-1-1-500" epub:type="noteref">500</a></p>
					<p>In the foregoing cases a person is supposed to influence vegetation homoeopathically. He infects trees or plants with qualities or accidents, good or bad, resembling and derived from his own. But on the principle of homoeopathic magic the influence is mutual: the plant can infect the man just as much as the man can infect the plant. In magic, as I believe in physics, action and reaction are equal and opposite. The Cherokee Indians are adepts in practical botany of the homoeopathic sort. Thus wiry roots of the catgut plant or devil’s shoestring (<i>Tephrosia</i>) are so tough that they can almost stop a ploughshare in the furrow. Hence Cherokee women wash their heads with a decoction of the roots to make the hair strong, and Cherokee ballplayers wash themselves with it to toughen their muscles. To help them to spring quickly to their feet when they are thrown to the ground, these Indian ballplayers also bathe their limbs with a decoction of the small rush (<i>Juncus tenuis</i>), which, they say, always recovers its erect position, no matter how often it is trampled down. To improve a child’s memory the Cherokees beat up burs in water which has been fetched from a roaring waterfall. The virtue of the potion is threefold. The voice of the Long Man or river-god is heard in the roar of the cataract; the stream seizes and holds things cast upon its surface; and there is nothing that sticks like a bur. Hence it seems clear that with the potion the child will drink in the lessons taught by the voice of the waters, will seize them like the stream, and stick fast to them like a bur. For a like reason the Cherokee fisherman ties the plant called Venus’ flytrap (<i>Dionaea</i>) to his fishtrap, and he chews the plant and spits it on the bait. That will be sure to make the trap and the bait catch fish, just as Venus’ flytrap catches and digests the insects which alight on it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-501" id="noteref-1-1-501" epub:type="noteref">501</a> The Kei islanders think that certain creepers which adhere firmly to the trunks of trees prevent voyagers at sea from being wafted hither and thither at the mercy of the wind and the waves; the adhesive power of the plants enables the mariners to go straight to their destination.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-502" id="noteref-1-1-502" epub:type="noteref">502</a> It is a Galelareese belief that if you eat a fruit which has fallen to the ground, you will yourself contract a disposition to stumble and fall; and that if you partake of something which has been forgotten (such as a sweet potato left in the pot or a banana in the fire), you will become forgetful.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-503" id="noteref-1-1-503" epub:type="noteref">503</a> The Galelareese are also of opinion that if a woman were to consume two bananas growing from a single head she would give birth to twins.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-504" id="noteref-1-1-504" epub:type="noteref">504</a> The Guarani Indians of South America thought that a woman would become a mother of twins if she ate a double grain of millet.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-505" id="noteref-1-1-505" epub:type="noteref">505</a> In Vedic times a curious application of this principle supplied a charm by which a banished prince might be restored to his kingdom. He had to eat food cooked on a fire which was fed with wood which had grown out of the stump of a tree which had been cut down. The recuperative power manifested by such a tree would in due course be communicated through the fire to the food, and so to the prince, who ate the food which was cooked on the fire which was fed with the wood which grew out of the tree.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-506" id="noteref-1-1-506" epub:type="noteref">506</a> Among the Lkuñgen Indians of Vancouver Island an infallible means of making your hair grow long is to rub it with fish oil and the pulverised fruit of a particular kind of poplar (<i>Populus trichocarpa</i>). As the fruit grows a long way up the tree, it cannot fail to make your hair grow long too.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-507" id="noteref-1-1-507" epub:type="noteref">507</a> At Allumba, in Central Australia, there is a tree to which the sun, in the shape of a woman, is said to have travelled from the east. The natives believe that if the tree were destroyed, they would all be burned up; and that were any man to kill and eat an opossum from this tree, the food would burn up all his inward parts so that he would die.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-508" id="noteref-1-1-508" epub:type="noteref">508</a> The Sundanese of the Indian Archipelago regard certain kinds of wood as unsuitable for use in house-building, especially such trees as have prickles or thorns on their trunks. They think that the life of people who lived in a house made of such timber would be thorny and full of trouble. Again, if a house is built of trees that have fallen, or lost their leaves through age, the inmates would die soon or would be hard put to it to earn their bread. Again, wood from a house that has been burnt down should never be used in building, for it would cause a fire to break out in the new house.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-509" id="noteref-1-1-509" epub:type="noteref">509</a> In Java some people would not build a house with the wood of a tree that has been uprooted by a storm, lest the house should fall down in like manner; and they take care not to construct the upright and the horizontal parts (the standing and lying parts, as they call them) of the edifice out of the same tree. The reason for this precaution is a belief that if the standing and lying woodwork was made out of the same tree, the inmates of the house would constantly suffer from ill health; no sooner had one of them got up from a bed of sickness than another would have to lie down on it; and so it would go on, one up and another down, perpetually.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-510" id="noteref-1-1-510" epub:type="noteref">510</a> Before Cherokee braves went forth to war the medicine-man used to give each man a small charmed root which made him absolutely invulnerable. On the eve of battle the warrior bathed in a running stream, chewed a portion of the root and spat the juice on his body in order that the bullets might slide from his skin like the drops of water. Some of my readers perhaps doubt whether this really made the men bombproof. There is a barren and paralysing spirit of scepticism abroad at the present day which is most deplorable. However, the efficacy of this particular charm was proved in the Civil War, for three hundred Cherokees served in the army of the South; and they were never, or hardly ever, wounded in action.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-511" id="noteref-1-1-511" epub:type="noteref">511</a> Near Charlotte Waters, in Central Australia, there is a tree which sprang up to mark the spot where a blind man died. It is called the Blind Tree by the natives, who think that if it were cut down all the people of the neighbourhood would become blind. A man who wishes to deprive his enemy of sight need only go to the tree by himself and rub it, muttering his wish and exhorting the magic virtue to go forth and do its baleful work.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-512" id="noteref-1-1-512" epub:type="noteref">512</a></p>
					<p>In this last example the infectious quality, though it emanates directly from a tree, is derived originally from a man⁠—namely, the blind man⁠—who was buried at the place where the tree grew. Similarly, the Central Australians believe that a certain group of stones at Undiara are the petrified boils of an old man who long ago plucked them from his body and left them there; hence any man who wishes to infect his enemy with boils will go to these stones and throw miniature spears at them, taking care that the points of the spears strike the stones. Then the spears are picked up, and thrown one by one in the direction of the person whom it is intended to injure. The spears carry with them the magic virtue from the stones, and the result is an eruption of painful boils on the body of the victim. Sometimes a whole group of people can be afflicted in this way by a skilful magician.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-513" id="noteref-1-1-513" epub:type="noteref">513</a> These examples introduce us to a fruitful branch of homoeopathic magic, namely to that department of it which works by means of the dead; for just as the dead can neither see nor hear nor speak, so you may on homoeopathic principles render people blind, deaf, and dumb by the use of dead men’s bones or anything else that is tainted by the infection of death. Thus among the Galelareese, when a young man goes a-wooing at night, he takes a little earth from a grave and strews it on the roof of his sweetheart’s house just above the place where her parents sleep. This, he fancies, will prevent them from waking while he converses with his beloved, since the earth from the grave will make them sleep as sound as the dead.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-514" id="noteref-1-1-514" epub:type="noteref">514</a> Burglars in all ages and many lands have been patrons of this species of magic, which is very useful to them in the exercise of their profession. Thus a South Slavonian housebreaker sometimes begins operations by throwing a dead man’s bone over the house, saying, with pungent sarcasm, “As this bone may waken, so may these people waken”; after that not a soul in the house can keep his or her eyes open.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-515" id="noteref-1-1-515" epub:type="noteref">515</a> Similarly, in Java the burglar takes earth from a grave and sprinkles it round the house which he intends to rob; this throws the inmates into a deep sleep.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-516" id="noteref-1-1-516" epub:type="noteref">516</a> With the same intention a Hindu will strew ashes from a pyre at the door of the house;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-517" id="noteref-1-1-517" epub:type="noteref">517</a> Indians of Peru scatter the dust of dead men’s bones;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-518" id="noteref-1-1-518" epub:type="noteref">518</a> and Ruthenian burglars remove the marrow from a human shinbone, pour tallow into it, and having kindled the tallow, march thrice round the house with this candle burning, which causes the inmates to sleep a deathlike sleep. Or the Ruthenian will make a flute out of a human leg-bone and play upon it; whereupon all persons within hearing are overcome with drowsiness.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-519" id="noteref-1-1-519" epub:type="noteref">519</a> The Indians of Mexico employed for this maleficent purpose the left forearm of a woman who had died in giving birth to her first child; but the arm had to be stolen. With it they beat the ground before they entered the house which they designed to plunder; this caused everyone in the house to lose all power of speech and motion; they were as dead, hearing and seeing everything, but perfectly powerless; some of them, however, really slept and even snored.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-520" id="noteref-1-1-520" epub:type="noteref">520</a> In Europe similar properties were ascribed to the Hand of Glory, which was the dried and pickled hand of a man who had been hanged. If a candle made of the fat of a malefactor who had also died on the gallows was lighted and placed in the Hand of Glory as in a candlestick, it rendered motionless all persons to whom it was presented; they could not stir a finger any more than if they were dead.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-521" id="noteref-1-1-521" epub:type="noteref">521</a> Sometimes the dead man’s hand is itself the candle, or rather bunch of candles, all its withered fingers being set on fire; but should any member of the household be awake, one of the fingers will not kindle. Such nefarious lights can only be extinguished with milk.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-522" id="noteref-1-1-522" epub:type="noteref">522</a> Often it is prescribed that the thief’s candle should be made of the finger of a newborn or, still better, unborn child; sometimes it is thought needful that the thief should have one such candle for every person in the house, for if he has one candle too little somebody in the house will wake and catch him. Once these tapers begin to burn, there is nothing but milk that will put them out. In the seventeenth century robbers used to murder pregnant women in order thus to extract candles from their wombs.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-523" id="noteref-1-1-523" epub:type="noteref">523</a> An ancient Greek robber or burglar thought he could silence and put to flight the fiercest watchdogs by carrying with him a brand plucked from a funeral pyre.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-524" id="noteref-1-1-524" epub:type="noteref">524</a></p>
					<p>Again, Serbian and Bulgarian women who chafe at the restraints of domestic life will take the copper coins from the eyes of a corpse, wash them in wine or water, and give the liquid to their husbands to drink. After swallowing it, the husband will be as blind to his wife’s peccadilloes as the dead man was on whose eyes the coins were laid.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-525" id="noteref-1-1-525" epub:type="noteref">525</a> When a Blackfoot Indian went out eagle-hunting, he used to take a skull with him, because he believed that the skull would make him invisible, like the dead person to whom it had belonged, and so the eagles would not be able to see and attack him.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-526" id="noteref-1-1-526" epub:type="noteref">526</a> The Tarahumares of Mexico are great runners, and parties of them engage in races with each other. They believe that human bones induce fatigue; hence before a race the friends of one side will bury dead men’s bones in the track, hoping that the runners of the other side will pass over them and so be weakened. Naturally they warn their own men to shun the spot where the bones are buried.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-527" id="noteref-1-1-527" epub:type="noteref">527</a> The Belep of New Caledonia think that they can disable an enemy from flight by means of the leg-bone of a dead foe. They stick certain plants into the bone, and then smash it between stones before the skulls of their ancestors. It is easy to see that this breaks the leg of the living enemy and so hinders him from running away. Hence in time of war men fortify themselves with amulets of this sort.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-528" id="noteref-1-1-528" epub:type="noteref">528</a> The ancient Greeks seem to have thought that to set a young male child on a tomb would be to rob him of his manhood by infecting him with the impotence of the dead.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-529" id="noteref-1-1-529" epub:type="noteref">529</a> And as there is no memory in the grave the Arabs think that earth from a grave can make a man forget his griefs and sorrows, especially the sorrow of an unhappy love.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-530" id="noteref-1-1-530" epub:type="noteref">530</a></p>
					<p>Again, animals are often conceived to possess qualities or properties which might be useful to man, and homoeopathic or imitative magic seeks to communicate these properties to human beings in various ways. Thus some Bechuanas wear a ferret as a charm, because, being very tenacious of life, it will make them difficult to kill.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-531" id="noteref-1-1-531" epub:type="noteref">531</a> Others wear a certain insect, mutilated, but living, for a similar purpose.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-532" id="noteref-1-1-532" epub:type="noteref">532</a> Yet other Bechuana warriors wear the hair of a hornless ox among their own hair, and the skin of a frog on their mantle, because a frog is slippery, and the ox, having no horns, is hard to catch; so the man who is provided with these charms believes that he will be as hard to hold as the ox and the frog.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-533" id="noteref-1-1-533" epub:type="noteref">533</a> Again, it seems plain that a South African warrior who twists tufts of rats’ hair among his own curly black locks will have just as many chances of avoiding the enemy’s spear as the nimble rat has of avoiding things thrown at it; hence in these regions rats’ hair is in great demand when war is expected.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-534" id="noteref-1-1-534" epub:type="noteref">534</a> In Morocco a fowl or a pigeon may sometimes be seen with a little red bundle tied to its foot; the bundle contains a charm, and it is believed that as the charm is kept in constant motion by the bird, a corresponding restlessness is kept up in the mind of him or her against whom the charm is directed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-535" id="noteref-1-1-535" epub:type="noteref">535</a> When a Galla sees a tortoise, he will take off his sandals and step on it, believing that the soles of his feet are thereby made hard and strong like the shell of the animal.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-536" id="noteref-1-1-536" epub:type="noteref">536</a> The Wajaggas of Eastern Africa think that if they wear a piece of the wing-bone of a vulture tied round their leg they will be able to run and not grow weary, just as the vulture flies unwearied through the sky.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-537" id="noteref-1-1-537" epub:type="noteref">537</a> The Eskimo of Baffin Land fancy that if part of the intestines of a fox is placed under the feet of a baby boy, he will become active and skilful in walking over thin ice, like a fox.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-538" id="noteref-1-1-538" epub:type="noteref">538</a> One of the ancient books of India prescribes that when a sacrifice is offered for victory, the earth out of which the altar is to be made should be taken from a place where a boar has been wallowing, since the strength of the boar will be in that earth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-539" id="noteref-1-1-539" epub:type="noteref">539</a> When you are playing the one-stringed lute, and your fingers are stiff, the thing to do is to catch some long-legged field spiders and roast them, and then rub your fingers with the ashes; that will make your fingers as lithe and nimble as the spiders’ legs⁠—at least so think the Galelareese.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-540" id="noteref-1-1-540" epub:type="noteref">540</a> As the sea-eagle is very expert at seizing fish in its talons, the Kei islanders use its claws as a charm to enable them to make great gain on their trading voyages.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-541" id="noteref-1-1-541" epub:type="noteref">541</a> The children of the Baronga on Delagoa Bay are much troubled by a small worm which burrows under their skin, where its meanderings are visible to the eye. To guard her little one against this insect pest a Baronga mother will attach to its wrist the skin of a mole which burrows just under the surface of the ground, exactly as the worm burrows under the infant’s skin.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-542" id="noteref-1-1-542" epub:type="noteref">542</a> To bring back a runaway slave an Arab of North Africa will trace a magic circle on the ground, stick a nail in the middle of it, and attach a beetle by a thread to the nail, taking care that the sex of the beetle is that of the fugitive. As the beetle crawls round and round it will coil the thread about the nail, thus shortening its tether and drawing nearer to the centre at every circuit. So by virtue of homoeopathic magic the runaway slave will be drawn back to his master.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-543" id="noteref-1-1-543" epub:type="noteref">543</a> The Patagonian Indians kill a mare and put a newborn boy in its body, believing that this will make him a good horseman.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-544" id="noteref-1-1-544" epub:type="noteref">544</a> The Lkuñgen Indians of Vancouver’s Island believe that the ashes of wasps rubbed on the faces of warriors going to battle will render the men as pugnacious as wasps, and that a decoction of wasps’ nests or of flies administered internally to barren women will make them prolific like the insects.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-545" id="noteref-1-1-545" epub:type="noteref">545</a></p>
					<p>Among the western tribes of British New Guinea, a man who has killed a snake will burn it and smear his legs with the ashes when he goes into the forest; for no snake will bite him for some days afterwards.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-546" id="noteref-1-1-546" epub:type="noteref">546</a> The Baronga of Delagoa Bay carry the powdered ashes of a serpent in a little bag as a talisman which guards them from snakebites.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-547" id="noteref-1-1-547" epub:type="noteref">547</a> Among the Arabs of Moab a woman will give her infant daughter the ashes of a scorpion mixed with milk to drink in order to protect her against the stings of scorpions.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-548" id="noteref-1-1-548" epub:type="noteref">548</a> The Cholones of eastern Peru think that to carry the poison tooth of a serpent is a protection against the bite of a serpent, and that to rub the cheek with the tooth of an ounce is an infallible remedy for toothache and face-ache.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-549" id="noteref-1-1-549" epub:type="noteref">549</a> In order to strengthen her teeth some Brazilian Indians used to hang round a girl’s neck at puberty the teeth of an animal which they called <i>capugouare</i>, that is “grass-eating.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-550" id="noteref-1-1-550" epub:type="noteref">550</a> When a thoroughbred mare has drunk at a trough, an Arab woman will hasten to drink any water that remains in order that she may give birth to strong children.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-551" id="noteref-1-1-551" epub:type="noteref">551</a> If a South Slavonian has a mind to pilfer and steal at market, he has nothing to do but to burn a blind cat, and then throw a pinch of its ashes over the person with whom he is higgling; after that he can take what he likes from the booth, and the owner will not be a bit the wiser, having become as blind as the deceased cat with whose ashes he has been sprinkled. The thief may even ask boldly “Did I pay for it?” and the deluded huckster will reply, “Why, certainly.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-552" id="noteref-1-1-552" epub:type="noteref">552</a> Equally simple and effectual is the expedient adopted by natives of Central Australia who desire to cultivate their beards. They prick the chin all over with a pointed bone, and then stroke it carefully with a magic stick or stone, which represents a kind of rat that has very long whiskers. The virtue of these whiskers naturally passes into the representative stick or stone, and thence by an easy transition to the chin, which, consequently, is soon adorned with a rich growth of beard.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-553" id="noteref-1-1-553" epub:type="noteref">553</a> When a party of these same natives has returned from killing a foe, and they fear to be attacked by the ghost of the dead man in their sleep, every one of them takes care to wear the tip of the tail of a rabbit-kangaroo in his hair. Why? Because the rabbit-kangaroo, being a nocturnal animal, does not sleep of nights; and therefore a man who wears a tip of its tail in his hair will clearly be wakeful during the hours of darkness.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-554" id="noteref-1-1-554" epub:type="noteref">554</a> The Unmatjera tribe of Central Australia use the tip of the tail of the same animal for the same purpose, but they draw out the sympathetic chain one link farther. For among them, when a boy has undergone subincision and is leading a solitary life in the bush, it is not he but his mother who wears the tip of the nocturnal creature’s tail in order that he may be watchful at nights, lest harm should befall him from snakes and so forth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-555" id="noteref-1-1-555" epub:type="noteref">555</a> The ancient Greeks thought that to eat the flesh of the wakeful nightingale would prevent a man from sleeping; that to smear the eyes of a blear-sighted person with the gall of an eagle would give him the eagle’s vision; and that a raven’s eggs would restore the blackness of the raven to silvery hair. Only the person who adopted this last mode of concealing the ravages of time had to be most careful to keep his mouth full of oil all the time he applied the eggs to his venerable locks, else his teeth as well as his hair would be dyed raven black, and no amount of scrubbing and scouring would avail to whiten them again.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-556" id="noteref-1-1-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a> The hair-restorer was in fact a shade too powerful, and in applying it you might get more than you bargained for.</p>
					<p>The Huichol Indians of Mexico admire the beautiful markings on the backs of serpents. Hence when a Huichol woman is about to weave or embroider, her husband catches a large serpent and holds it in a cleft stick, while the woman strokes the reptile with one hand down the whole length of its back; then she passes the same hand over her forehead and eyes, that she may be able to work as beautiful patterns in the web as the markings on the back of the serpent.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-557" id="noteref-1-1-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a> Among the Tarahumares of Mexico men who run races tie deer-hoofs to their backs in the belief that this will make them swift-footed like the deer.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-558" id="noteref-1-1-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a> Cherokee ballplayers rub their bodies with eel-skins in order to make themselves as slippery and hard to hold as eels; and they also apply land-tortoises to their legs in the hope of making them as thick and strong as the legs of these animals. But they are careful not to eat frogs, lest the brittleness of the frog’s bones should infect their own bones. Moreover, they will not eat the flesh of the sluggish hog-sucker, lest they should lose their speed, nor the flesh of rabbits, lest, like the rabbit, they should become confused in running. On the other hand, their friends sprinkle a soup made of rabbit hamstrings along the path to be taken by their rivals, in order to make these rivals timorous in action. Moreover, the ballplayers will not wear the feathers of the bald-headed buzzard, for fear of themselves becoming bald, nor turkey feathers, lest they should suffer from a goitrous growth on the throat like the red appendage on the throat of a turkey.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-559" id="noteref-1-1-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a> The flesh of the common grey squirrel is forbidden to Cherokees who suffer from rheumatism, because the squirrel eats in a cramped position, which would clearly aggravate the pangs of the rheumatic patient.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-560" id="noteref-1-1-560" epub:type="noteref">560</a> And a Cherokee woman who is with child may not eat the flesh of the ruffed grouse, because that bird hatches a large brood, but loses most of them before maturity. Strict people, indeed, will not allow a woman to taste of the bird till she is past childbearing.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-561" id="noteref-1-1-561" epub:type="noteref">561</a> When a Cherokee is starting on a journey on a cold winter morning he rubs his feet in the ashes of the fire and sings four verses by means of which he can set the cold at defiance, like the wolf, the deer, the fox, and the opossum, whose feet, so the Indians think, are never frostbitten. After each verse he imitates the cry and action of the animal, thus homoeopathically identifying himself with the creature. The song he sings may be rendered, “I become a real wolf, a real deer, a real fox, and a real opossum.” After stating that he has become a real wolf, the songster utters a prolonged howl and paws the ground like a wolf with his feet. After giving notice that he has become a real deer, he imitates the call and jumping of a deer. And after announcing his identification, for all practical purposes, with a fox and an opossum, he mimicks the barking and scratching of a fox and the cry of an opossum when it is driven to bay, also throwing his head back just as an opossum does when it feigns death.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-562" id="noteref-1-1-562" epub:type="noteref">562</a> Some Cherokees are said to drink tea made of crickets in order to become good singers like the insects.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-563" id="noteref-1-1-563" epub:type="noteref">563</a> If the eyes of a Cherokee child be bathed with water in which a feather of an owl has been soaked, the child will be able, like the owl, to keep awake all night. The mole-cricket has claws with which it burrows in the earth, and among the Cherokees it is reputed to be an excellent singer. Hence when children are long of learning to speak, their tongues are scratched with the claw of a live mole-cricket in order that they may soon talk as distinctly as the insect. Grown persons also, who are slow of speech, may acquire a ready flow of eloquence, if only the inside of their throat be scratched on four successive mornings with a mole-cricket.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-564" id="noteref-1-1-564" epub:type="noteref">564</a> The negroes of the Maroni river in Guiana have a somewhat similar cure for stammering. Day and night the shrieks of a certain species of ape resound through the forest. Hence when the negroes kill one of these pests, they remove its larynx and make a cup out of it. If a stammering child drinks out of such a cup for a few months, it ceases to stammer.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-565" id="noteref-1-1-565" epub:type="noteref">565</a> Cherokee parents scratch the hands of their children with the pincers of a live red crawfish, resembling a lobster, in order to give the infants a strong grip, like that of the crawfish.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-566" id="noteref-1-1-566" epub:type="noteref">566</a> This may help us to understand why on the fifth day after birth a Greek child used to receive presents of octopuses and cuttlefish from its friends and relations.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-567" id="noteref-1-1-567" epub:type="noteref">567</a> For the numerous arms, legs, and tentacles of these creatures seem well calculated to strengthen the grip of a baby’s hands and to impart the power of toddling to its little toes.</p>
					<p>On the principle of homoeopathic magic, inanimate things, as well as plants and animals, may diffuse blessing or bane around them, according to their own intrinsic nature and the skill of the wizard to tap or dam, as the case may be, the stream of weal or woe. Thus, for example, the Galelareese think that when your teeth are being filed you should keep spitting on a pebble, for this establishes a homoeopathic connection between you and the pebble, by virtue of which your teeth will henceforth be as hard and durable as a stone. On the other hand, you ought not to comb a child before it has teethed, for if you do, its teeth will afterwards be separated from each other like the teeth of a comb.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-568" id="noteref-1-1-568" epub:type="noteref">568</a> Nor should children look at a sieve, otherwise they will suffer from a skin disease, and will have as many sores on their bodies as there are holes in the sieve.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-569" id="noteref-1-1-569" epub:type="noteref">569</a> In Samaracand women give a baby sugar candy to suck and put glue in the palm of its hand, in order that, when the child grows up, his words may be sweet and precious things may stick to his hands as if they were glued.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-570" id="noteref-1-1-570" epub:type="noteref">570</a> The Greeks thought that a garment made from the fleece of a sheep that had been torn by a wolf would hurt the wearer, setting up an itch or irritation in his skin. They were also of opinion that if a stone which had been bitten by a dog were dropped in wine, it would make all who drank of that wine to fall out among themselves.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-571" id="noteref-1-1-571" epub:type="noteref">571</a> Among the Arabs of Moab a childless woman often borrows the robe of a woman who has had many children, hoping with the robe to acquire the fruitfulness of its owner.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-572" id="noteref-1-1-572" epub:type="noteref">572</a> The Caffres of Sofala, in East Africa, had a great dread of being struck with anything hollow, such as a reed or a straw, and greatly preferred being thrashed with a good thick cudgel or an iron bar, even though it hurt very much. For they thought that if a man were beaten with anything hollow, his inside would waste away till he died.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-573" id="noteref-1-1-573" epub:type="noteref">573</a> In eastern seas there is a large shell which the Buginese of Celebes call the “old man” (<i>kadjâwo</i>). On Fridays they turn these “old men” upside down and place them on the thresholds of their houses, believing that whoever then steps over the threshold of the house will live to be old.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-574" id="noteref-1-1-574" epub:type="noteref">574</a> Again, the Galelareese think that, if you are imprudent enough to eat while somebody is sharpening a knife, your throat will be cut that same evening, or next morning at latest.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-575" id="noteref-1-1-575" epub:type="noteref">575</a> The disastrous influence thus attributed, under certain circumstances, to a knife in the East Indies, finds its counterpart in a curious old Greek story. A certain king had no child, and he asked a wise man how he could get one. The wise man himself did not know, but he thought that the birds of the air might, and he undertook to enquire of them. For you must know that the sage understood the language of birds, having learned it through some serpents whose life he had saved, and who, out of gratitude, had cleansed his ears as he slept. So he sacrificed two bulls, and cut them up, and prayed the fowls to come and feast on the flesh; only the vulture he did not invite. When the birds came, the wise man asked them what the king must do to get a son; but none of them knew. At last up came the vulture, and he knew all about it. He said that once when the king was a child his royal father was gelding rams in the field, and laid down the bloody knife beside his little son; nay, he threatened the boy with it. The child was afraid and ran away, and the father stuck the knife in a tree, either a sacred oak or a wild pear-tree. Meanwhile, the bark of the tree had grown round the knife and hidden it. The vulture said that if they found the knife, scraped the rust off it, and gave the rust, mixed with wine, to the king to drink for ten days, he would beget a son. They did so, and it fell out exactly as the vulture had said.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-576" id="noteref-1-1-576" epub:type="noteref">576</a> In this story a knife which had gelded rams is supposed to have deprived a boy of his virility merely by being brought near his person. Through simple proximity it infected him, so to say, with the same disability which it had already inflicted on the rams; and the loss he thus sustained was afterwards repaired by administering to him in a potion the rust which, having been left on the blade by the blood of the animals, might be supposed to be still imbued with their generative faculty.</p>
					<p>The strengthening virtue of iron is highly appreciated by the Toradjas of Central Celebes, only they apply it externally, not internally, as we do in Europe. For this purpose the people of a village assemble once a year in the smithy. The master of the ceremonies opens the proceedings by carrying a little pig and a white fowl round the smithy, after which he kills them and smears a little of their blood on the forehead of every person present. Next he takes a doit, a chopping-knife, and a bunch of leaves in his hand, and strikes with them the palm of the right hand of every man, woman, and child, and ties a leaf of the <i>Dracaena terminalis</i> to every wrist. Then a little fire is made in the furnace and blown up with the bellows. Everyone who feels sick or unwell now steps up to the anvil, and the master of the ceremonies sprinkles a mixture of pigs’ blood, water, and herbs on the joints of his body, and finally on his head, wishing him a long life. Lastly, the patient takes the chopping-knife, heats it in the furnace, lays it on the anvil, and strikes it seven times with the hammer. After that he has only to cool the knife in water and the iron cure is complete. Again, on the seventh day after a birth the Toradjas hold a little feast, at which the child is carried down the house ladder and its feet set on a piece of iron, in order to strengthen its feeble soul with the strong soul of the iron.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-577" id="noteref-1-1-577" epub:type="noteref">577</a> At critical times the Mahakam Dyaks of Central Borneo seek to strengthen their souls by biting on an old sword or setting their feet upon it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-578" id="noteref-1-1-578" epub:type="noteref">578</a> At initiation a Brahman boy is made to tread with his right foot on a stone, while the words are repeated, “Tread on this stone; like a stone be firm”;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-579" id="noteref-1-1-579" epub:type="noteref">579</a> and the same ceremony is performed, with the same words, by a Brahman bride at her marriage.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-580" id="noteref-1-1-580" epub:type="noteref">580</a> In Madagascar a mode of counteracting the levity of fortune is to bury a stone at the foot of the heavy house-post.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-581" id="noteref-1-1-581" epub:type="noteref">581</a> The common custom of swearing upon a stone may be based partly on a belief that the strength and stability of the stone lend confirmation to an oath. Thus the old Danish historian Saxo Grammaticus tells us that “the ancients, when they were to choose a king, were wont to stand on stones planted in the ground, and to proclaim their votes, in order to foreshadow from the steadfastness of the stones that the deed would be lasting.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-582" id="noteref-1-1-582" epub:type="noteref">582</a> There was a stone at Athens on which the nine archons stood when they swore to rule justly and according to the laws.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-583" id="noteref-1-1-583" epub:type="noteref">583</a> A little to the west of <abbr>St.</abbr> Columba’s tomb in Iona “lie the black stones, which are so called, not from their colour, for that is grey, but from the effects that tradition says ensued upon perjury, if anyone became guilty of it after swearing on these stones in the usual manner; for an oath made on them was decisive in all controversies. Mac-Donald, king of the isles, delivered the rights of their lands to his vassals in the isles and continent, with uplifted hands and bended knees, on the black stones; and in this posture, before many witnesses, he solemnly swore that he would never recall those rights which he then granted: and this was instead of his great seal. Hence it is that when one was certain of what he affirmed, he said positively, I have freedom to swear this matter upon the black stones.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-584" id="noteref-1-1-584" epub:type="noteref">584</a> Again, in the island of Arran there was a green globular stone, about the size of a goose’s egg, on which oaths were taken. It was also endowed with healing virtue, for it cured stitches in the sides of sick people if only it was laid on the affected part. They say that Macdonald, the Lord of the Isles, carried this stone about with him, and that victory was always on his side when he threw it among the enemy.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-585" id="noteref-1-1-585" epub:type="noteref">585</a> Once more, in the island of Fladda there was a round blue stone, on which people swore decisive oaths, and it too healed stitches in the side like the green stone of Arran.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-586" id="noteref-1-1-586" epub:type="noteref">586</a> When two Bogos of eastern Africa have a dispute, they will sometimes settle it at a certain stone, which one of them mounts. His adversary calls down the most dreadful curses on him if he forswears himself, and to every curse the man on the stone answers “Amen!”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-587" id="noteref-1-1-587" epub:type="noteref">587</a> In Laconia an unwrought stone was shown which, according to the legend, relieved the matricide Orestes of his madness as soon as he had sat down on it;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-588" id="noteref-1-1-588" epub:type="noteref">588</a> and Zeus is said to have often cured himself of his love for Hera by sitting down on a certain rock in the island of Leucadia.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-589" id="noteref-1-1-589" epub:type="noteref">589</a> In these cases it may have been thought that the wayward and flighty impulses of love and madness were counteracted by the steadying influence of a heavy stone.</p>
					<p>But while a general magical efficacy may be supposed to reside in all stones by reason of their common properties of weight and solidity, special magical virtues are attributed to particular stones, or kinds of stone, in accordance with their individual or specific qualities of shape and colour. For example, a pothole in a rocky gorge of Central Australia contains many rounded boulders which, in the opinion of the Warramunga tribe, represent the kidneys, heart, tail, intestines, and so forth of an old euro, a species of kangaroo. Hence the natives jump into the pool, and after splashing the water all over their bodies rub one another with the stones, believing that this will enable them to catch euros.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-590" id="noteref-1-1-590" epub:type="noteref">590</a> Again, not very far from Alice Springs, in Central Australia, there is a heap of stones supposed to be the vomit of two men of the eagle-hawk totem who had dined too copiously on eagle-hawk men, women, and children. The natives think that if any person caught sight of these stones he would be taken very sick on the spot; hence the heap is covered with sticks, to which every passerby adds one in order to prevent the evil magic from coming out and turning his stomach.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-591" id="noteref-1-1-591" epub:type="noteref">591</a> The Indians of Peru employed certain stones for the increase of maize, others for the increase of potatoes, and others again for the increase of cattle. The stones used to make maize grow were fashioned in the likeness of cobs of maize, and the stones destined to multiply cattle had the shape of sheep.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-592" id="noteref-1-1-592" epub:type="noteref">592</a></p>
					<p>No people perhaps employ stones more freely for the purposes of homoeopathic magic than the natives of New Caledonia. They have stones of the most diverse shapes and colours to serve the most diverse ends⁠—stones for sunshine, rain, famine, war, madness, death, fishing, sailing, and so forth. Thus in order to make a plantation of taro thrive they bury in the field certain stones resembling taros, praying to their ancestors at the same time. A stone marked with black lines like the leaves of the coconut palm helps to produce a good crop of coconuts. To make breadfruit grow they use two stones of different sizes representing the unripe and the ripe fruit respectively. As soon as the fruit begins to form, they bury the small stone at the foot of the tree; and later on, when the fruit approaches maturity, they replace the small stone by the large one. The yam is the chief crop of the New Caledonians; hence the number of stones used to foster its growth is correspondingly great. Different families have different kinds of stones which, according to their diverse shapes and colours, are supposed to promote the cultivation of the various species of yams. Before the stones are buried in the yam field they are deposited beside the ancestral skulls, wetted with water, and wiped with the leaves of certain trees. Sacrifices, too, of yams and fish are offered to the dead, with the words, “Here are your offerings, in order that the crop of yams may be good.” Again, a stone carved in the shape of a canoe can make a voyage prosperous or the reverse according as it is placed before the ancestral skulls with the opening upwards or downwards, the ceremony being accompanied with prayers and offerings to the dead. Again, fish is a very important article of diet with the New Caledonians, and every kind of fish has its sacred stone, which is enclosed in a large shell and kept in the graveyard. In performing the rite to secure a good catch, the wizard swathes the stone in bandages of various colours, spits some chewed leaves on it, and, setting it up before the skulls, says, “Help us to be lucky at the fishing.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-593" id="noteref-1-1-593" epub:type="noteref">593</a> In these and many similar practices of the New Caledonians the magical efficacy of the stones appears to be deemed insufficient of itself to accomplish the end in view; it has to be reinforced by the spirits of the dead, whose help is sought by prayer and sacrifice. Moreover, the stones are regularly kept in the burial-grounds, as if to saturate them with the powerful influence of the ancestors; they are brought from the cemetery to be buried in the fields or at the foot of trees for the sake of quickening the fruits of the earth, and they are restored to the cemetery when they have discharged this duty. Thus in New Caledonia magic is blent with the worship of the dead.</p>
					<p>In other parts of Melanesia a like belief prevails that certain sacred stones are endowed with miraculous powers which correspond in their nature to the shape of the stone. Thus a piece of water-worn coral on the beach often bears a surprising likeness to a breadfruit. Hence in the Banks Islands a man who finds such a coral will lay it at the root of one of his breadfruit trees in the expectation that it will make the tree bear well. If the result answers his expectation, he will then, for a proper remuneration, take stones of less-marked character from other men and let them lie near his, in order to imbue them with the magic virtue which resides in it. Similarly, a stone with little discs upon it is good to bring in money; and if a man found a large stone with a number of small ones under it, like a sow among her litter, he was sure that to offer money upon it would bring him pigs. In these and similar cases the Melanesians ascribe the marvellous power, not to the stone itself, but to its indwelling spirit; and sometimes, as we have just seen, a man endeavours to propitiate the spirit by laying down offerings on the stone.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-594" id="noteref-1-1-594" epub:type="noteref">594</a> But the conception of spirits that must be propitiated lies outside the sphere of magic, and within that of religion. Where such a conception is found, as here, in conjunction with purely magical ideas and practices, the latter may generally be assumed to be the original stock on which the religious conception has been at some later time engrafted. For there are strong grounds for thinking that, in the evolution of thought, magic has preceded religion. But to this point we shall return presently.</p>
					<p>The ancients set great store on the magical qualities of precious stones; indeed it has been maintained, with great show of reason, that such stones were used as amulets long before they were worn as mere ornaments.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-595" id="noteref-1-1-595" epub:type="noteref">595</a> Thus the Greeks gave the name of tree-agate to a stone which exhibits treelike markings, and they thought that if two of these gems were tied to the horns or neck of oxen at the plough, the crop would be sure to be plentiful.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-596" id="noteref-1-1-596" epub:type="noteref">596</a> Again, they recognised a milk-stone which produced an abundant supply of milk in women if only they drank it dissolved in honey-mead.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-597" id="noteref-1-1-597" epub:type="noteref">597</a> Milk-stones are used for the same purpose by Greek women in Crete and Melos at the present day;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-598" id="noteref-1-1-598" epub:type="noteref">598</a> in Albania nursing mothers wear the stones in order to ensure an abundant flow of milk.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-599" id="noteref-1-1-599" epub:type="noteref">599</a> In Lechrain down to modern times German women have attempted to increase their milk by stroking their breasts with a kind of alum which they call a milk-stone.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-600" id="noteref-1-1-600" epub:type="noteref">600</a> Again, the Greeks believed in a stone which cured snakebites, and hence was named the snake-stone; to test its efficacy you had only to grind the stone to powder and sprinkle the powder on the wound.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-601" id="noteref-1-1-601" epub:type="noteref">601</a> The wine-coloured amethyst received its name, which means “not drunken,” because it was supposed to keep the wearer of it sober;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-602" id="noteref-1-1-602" epub:type="noteref">602</a> and two brothers who desired to live at unity were advised to carry magnets about with them, which, by drawing the twain together, would clearly prevent them from falling out.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-603" id="noteref-1-1-603" epub:type="noteref">603</a> In Albania people think that if the bloodstone is laid on a wound it will stop the flow of blood.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-604" id="noteref-1-1-604" epub:type="noteref">604</a></p>
					<p>Amongst the things which homoeopathic magic seeks to turn to account are the great powers of nature, such as the waxing and the waning moon, the rising and the setting sun, the stars, and the sea. Elsewhere I have illustrated the homoeopathic virtues ascribed to the waxing and the waning moon:​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-605" id="noteref-1-1-605" epub:type="noteref">605</a> here I will give an Arab charm of the setting sun. When a husband is far away and his wife would bring him home to her, she procures pepper and coriander seed from a shop that faces the east, and throws them on a lighted brasier at sunset. Then turning to the east she waves a napkin with which she has wiped herself and says: “Let the setting sun return having found such and such an one, son of such and such a woman, in grief and pain. May the grief that my absence causes him make him weep, may the grief that my absence causes him make him lament, may the grief that my absence causes him make him break the obstacles that part us and bring him back to me.” If the charm is unsuccessful, she repeats it one day at sunrise, burning the same perfumes. Clearly she imagines that as the sun goes away in the west and comes back in the east, it should at its return bring the absent one home.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-606" id="noteref-1-1-606" epub:type="noteref">606</a> The ancient books of the Hindus lay down a rule that after sunset on his marriage night a man should sit silent with his wife till the stars begin to twinkle in the sky. When the polestar appears, he should point it out to her, and, addressing the star, say, “Firm art thou; I see thee, the firm one. Firm be thou with me, O thriving one!” Then, turning to his wife, he should say, “To me Brihaspati has given thee; obtaining offspring through me, thy husband, live with me a hundred autumns.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-607" id="noteref-1-1-607" epub:type="noteref">607</a> The intention of the ceremony is plainly to guard against the fickleness of fortune and the instability of earthly bliss by the steadfast influence of the constant star. It is the wish expressed in Keats’s last sonnet:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Bright star! would I were steadfast as thou art⁠—</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Dwellers by the sea cannot fail to be impressed by the sight of its ceaseless ebb and flow, and are apt, on the principles of that rude philosophy of sympathy and resemblance which here engages our attention, to trace a subtle relation, a secret harmony, between its tides and the life of man, of animals, and of plants. In the flowing tide they see not merely a symbol, but a cause of exuberance, of prosperity, and of life, while in the ebbing tide they discern a real agent as well as a melancholy emblem of failure, of weakness, and of death. The Breton peasant fancies that clover sown when the tide is coming in will grow well, but that if the plant be sown at low water or when the tide is going out, it will never reach maturity, and that the cows which feed on it will burst.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-608" id="noteref-1-1-608" epub:type="noteref">608</a> His wife believes that the best butter is made when the tide has just turned and is beginning to flow, that milk which foams in the churn will go on foaming till the hour of high water is past, and that water drawn from the well or milk extracted from the cow while the tide is rising will boil up in the pot or saucepan and overflow into the fire.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-609" id="noteref-1-1-609" epub:type="noteref">609</a> The Galelareese say that if you wish to make oil, you should do it when the tide is high, for then you will get plenty of oil.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-610" id="noteref-1-1-610" epub:type="noteref">610</a> According to some of the ancients, the skins of seals, even after they had been parted from their bodies, remained in secret sympathy with the sea, and were observed to ruffle when the tide was on the ebb.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-611" id="noteref-1-1-611" epub:type="noteref">611</a> Another ancient belief, attributed to Aristotle, was that no creature can die except at ebb tide. The belief, if we can trust Pliny, was confirmed by experience, so far as regards human beings, on the coast of France.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-612" id="noteref-1-1-612" epub:type="noteref">612</a> Philostratus also assures us that at Cadiz dying people never yielded up the ghost while the water was high.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-613" id="noteref-1-1-613" epub:type="noteref">613</a> A like fancy still lingers in some parts of Europe. On the Cantabrian coast of Spain they think that persons who die of chronic or acute disease expire at the moment when the tide begins to recede.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-614" id="noteref-1-1-614" epub:type="noteref">614</a> In Portugal, all along the coast of Wales, and on some parts of the coast of Brittany, a belief is said to prevail that people are born when the tide comes in, and die when it goes out.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-615" id="noteref-1-1-615" epub:type="noteref">615</a> Dickens attests the existence of the same superstition in England. “People can’t die, along the coast,” said <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Peggotty, “except when the tide’s pretty nigh out. They can’t be born, unless it’s pretty nigh in⁠—not properly born till flood.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-616" id="noteref-1-1-616" epub:type="noteref">616</a> The belief that most deaths happen at ebb tide is said to be held along the east coast of England from Northumberland to Kent.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-617" id="noteref-1-1-617" epub:type="noteref">617</a> Shakespeare must have been familiar with it, for he makes Falstaff die “even just between twelve and one, e’en at the turning o’ the tide.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-618" id="noteref-1-1-618" epub:type="noteref">618</a> We meet the belief again on the Pacific coast of North America among the Haidas of the Queen Charlotte Islands. Whenever a good Haida is about to die he sees a canoe manned by some of his dead friends, who come with the tide to bid him welcome to the spirit land. “Come with us now,” they say, “for the tide is about to ebb and we must depart.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-619" id="noteref-1-1-619" epub:type="noteref">619</a> At the other extremity of America the same fancy has been noted among the Indians of Southern Chili. A Chilote Indian in the last stage of consumption, after preparing to die like a good Catholic, was heard to ask how the tide was running. When his sister told him that it was still coming in, he smiled and said that he had yet a little while to live. It was his firm conviction that with the ebbing tide his soul would pass to the ocean of eternity.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-620" id="noteref-1-1-620" epub:type="noteref">620</a> At Port Stephens, in New South Wales, the natives always buried their dead at flood tide, never at ebb, lest the retiring water should bear the soul of the departed to some distant country.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-621" id="noteref-1-1-621" epub:type="noteref">621</a></p>
					<p>To ensure a long life the Chinese have recourse to certain complicated charms, which concentrate in themselves the magical essence emanating, on homoeopathic principles, from times and seasons, from persons and from things. The vehicles employed to transmit these happy influences are no other than grave-clothes. These are provided by many Chinese in their lifetime, and most people have them cut out and sewn by an unmarried girl or a very young woman, wisely calculating that, since such a person is likely to live a great many years to come, a part of her capacity to live long must surely pass into the clothes, and thus stave off for many years the time when they shall be put to their proper use. Further, the garments are made by preference in a year which has an intercalary month; for to the Chinese mind it seems plain that grave-clothes made in a year which is unusually long will possess the capacity of prolonging life in an unusually high degree. Amongst the clothes there is one robe in particular on which special pains have been lavished to imbue it with this priceless quality. It is a long silken gown of the deepest blue colour, with the word “longevity” embroidered all over it in thread of gold. To present an aged parent with one of these costly and splendid mantles, known as “longevity garments,” is esteemed by the Chinese an act of filial piety and a delicate mark of attention. As the garment purports to prolong the life of its owner, he often wears it, especially on festive occasions, in order to allow the influence of longevity, created by the many golden letters with which it is bespangled, to work their full effect upon his person. On his birthday, above all, he hardly ever fails to don it, for in China common sense bids a man lay in a large stock of vital energy on his birthday, to be expended in the form of health and vigour during the rest of the year. Attired in the gorgeous pall, and absorbing its blessed influence at every pore, the happy owner receives complacently the congratulations of friends and relations, who warmly express their admiration of these magnificent cerements, and of the filial piety which prompted the children to bestow so beautiful and useful a present on the author of their being.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-622" id="noteref-1-1-622" epub:type="noteref">622</a></p>
					<p>Another application of the maxim that like produces like is seen in the Chinese belief that the fortunes of a town are deeply affected by its shape, and that they must vary according to the character of the thing which that shape most nearly resembles. Thus it is related that long ago the town of Tsuen-cheu-fu, the outlines of which are like those of a carp, frequently fell a prey to the depredations of the neighbouring city of Yung-chun, which is shaped like a fishing-net, until the inhabitants of the former town conceived the plan of erecting two tall pagodas in their midst. These pagodas, which still tower above the city of Tsuen-cheu-fu, have ever since exercised the happiest influence over its destiny by intercepting the imaginary net before it could descend and entangle in its meshes the imaginary carp.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-623" id="noteref-1-1-623" epub:type="noteref">623</a> Some thirty years ago the wise men of Shanghai were much exercised to discover the cause of a local rebellion. On careful enquiry they ascertained that the rebellion was due to the shape of a large new temple which had most unfortunately been built in the shape of a tortoise, an animal of the very worst character. The difficulty was serious, the danger was pressing; for to pull down the temple would have been impious, and to let it stand as it was would be to court a succession of similar or worse disasters. However, the genius of the local professors of geomancy, rising to the occasion, triumphantly surmounted the difficulty and obviated the danger. By filling up two wells, which represented the eyes of the tortoise, they at once blinded that disreputable animal and rendered him incapable of doing further mischief.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-624" id="noteref-1-1-624" epub:type="noteref">624</a></p>
					<p>Sometimes homoeopathic or imitative magic is called in to annul an evil omen by accomplishing it in mimicry. The effect is to circumvent destiny by substituting a mock calamity for a real one. At Kampot, a small seaport of Cambodia, a French official saw one morning a troop of armed guards escorting a man who was loaded with chains. They passed his house and went away towards the country, preceded by a man who drew lugubrious sounds from a gong, and followed by a score of idlers. The official thought it must be an execution and was surprised to have heard nothing about it. Afterwards he received from his interpreter the following lucid explanation of the affair. “In our country it sometimes happens that a man walking in the fields has nothing but the upper part of his body visible to people at a distance. Such an appearance is a sign that he will certainly die soon, and that is what happened last evening to the man you saw. Going homewards across the plain he carried over his shoulder a bundle of palms with long slender stems ending in fan-like tufts of leaves. His family, returning from their work, followed him at a distance, and soon they saw his head, shoulders, and arms moving along the road and carrying the branches, while his body and legs were invisible. Struck with consternation at the sight, his mother and wife repaired in all haste to the magistrate and implored him to proceed against the man after the fashion customary in such cases. The magistrate replied that the custom was ridiculous, and that he would be still more ridiculous if he complied with it. However, the two women insisted on it so vehemently, saying it was the only way to avert the omen, that he decided to do as they wished, and gave them his word that he would have the man arrested next morning at sunrise. So this morning the guards came to seize the poor man, telling him that he was accused of rebellion against the king, and without listening to his protestations of innocence they dragged him off to court. His family pretended to be surprised and followed him weeping. The judges had him clapped into irons and ordered him to instant execution. His own entreaties and the prayers of his family being all in vain, he begged that the priests of the pagoda might come and bear witness to his innocence and join their supplications to those of his friends. They came in haste, but receiving a hint how the wind lay they advised the condemned man to submit to his fate and departed to pray for his soul at the temple. Then the man was led away to a rice-field, in the middle of which a banana-tree, stripped of its leaves, had been set up as a stake. To this he was tied, and while his friends took their last leave of him, the sword of the executioner flashed through the air and at a single stroke swept off the top of the banana-tree above the head of the pretended victim. The man had given himself up for dead. His friends, while they knocked off his irons, explained to him the meaning of it all and led him away to thank the magistrates and priests for what they had done to save him from the threatened catastrophe.” The writer who reports the case adds that if the magistrates had not good-naturedly lent themselves to the pious fraud, the man’s family would have contrived in some other way to impress him with the terror of death in order to save his life.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-625" id="noteref-1-1-625" epub:type="noteref">625</a></p>
					<p>Again, two missionaries were journeying not long ago through Central Celebes, accompanied by some Toradjas. Unfortunately the note of a certain bird called <i>teka-teka</i> was heard to the left. This boded ill, and the natives insisted that they must either turn back or pass the night on the spot. When the missionaries refused to do either, an expedient was hit upon which allowed them to continue the journey in safety. A miniature hut was made out of a leafy branch, and in it were deposited a leaf moistened with spittle and a hair from the head of one of the party. Then one of the Toradjas said, “We shall pass the night here,” and addressing the hair he spoke thus: “If any misfortune should happen through the cry of that bird, may it fall on you.” In this way the evil omen was diverted from the real men and directed against their substitute the hair, and perhaps also the spittle, in the tiny hut.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-626" id="noteref-1-1-626" epub:type="noteref">626</a> When a Cherokee has dreamed of being stung by a snake, he is treated just in the same way as if he had really been stung; otherwise the place would swell and ulcerate in the usual manner, though perhaps years might pass before it did so. It is the ghost of a snake that has bitten him in sleep.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-627" id="noteref-1-1-627" epub:type="noteref">627</a> One night a Huron Indian dreamed that he had been taken and burned alive by his hereditary foes the Iroquois. Next morning a council was held on the affair, and the following measures were adopted to save the man’s life. Twelve or thirteen fires were kindled in the large hut where they usually burned their prisoners to death. Every man seized a flaming brand and applied it to the naked body of the dreamer, who shrieked with pain. Thrice he ran round the hut, escaping from one fire only to fall into another. As each man thrust his blazing torch at the sufferer he said, “Courage, my brother, it is thus that we have pity on you.” At last he was allowed to escape. Passing out of the hut he caught up a dog which was held ready for the purpose, and throwing it over his shoulder carried it through the wigwams as a sacred offering to the war-god, praying him to accept the animal instead of himself. Afterwards the dog was killed, roasted, and eaten, exactly as the Indians were wont to roast and eat their captives.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-628" id="noteref-1-1-628" epub:type="noteref">628</a></p>
					<p>In Madagascar this mode of cheating the fates is reduced to a regular system. Here every man’s fortune is determined by the day or hour of his birth, and if that happens to be an unlucky one his fate is sealed, unless the mischief can be extracted, as the phrase goes, by means of a substitute. The ways of extracting the mischief are various. For example, if a man is born on the first day of the second month (February), his house will be burnt down when he comes of age. To take time by the forelock and avoid this catastrophe, the friends of the infant will set up a shed in a field or in the cattle-fold and burn it. If the ceremony is to be really effective, the child and his mother should be placed in the shed and only plucked, like brands, from the burning hut before it is too late. Again, dripping November is the month of tears, and he who is born in it is born to sorrow. But in order to disperse the clouds that thus gather over his future, he has nothing to do but to take the lid off a boiling pot and wave it about. The drops that fall from it will accomplish his destiny and so prevent the tears from trickling from his eyes. Again, if fate has decreed that a young girl, still unwed, should see her children, still unborn, descend before her with sorrow to the grave, she can avert the calamity as follows. She kills a grasshopper, wraps it in a rag to represent a shroud, and mourns over it like Rachel weeping for her children and refusing to be comforted. Moreover, she takes a dozen or more other grasshoppers, and having removed some of their superfluous legs and wings she lays them about their dead and shrouded fellow. The buzz of the tortured insects and the agitated motions of their mutilated limbs represent the shrieks and contortions of the mourners at a funeral. After burying the deceased grasshopper she leaves the rest to continue their mourning till death releases them from their pain; and having bound up her dishevelled hair she retires from the grave with the step and carriage of a person plunged in grief. Thenceforth she looks cheerfully forward to seeing her children survive her; for it cannot be that she should mourn and bury them twice over. Once more, if fortune has frowned on a man at his birth and penury has marked him for her own, he can easily eraze the mark in question by purchasing a couple of cheap pearls, price three halfpence, and burying them. For who but the rich of this world can thus afford to fling pearls away?​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-629" id="noteref-1-1-629" epub:type="noteref">629</a></p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-1-3-3">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">Contagious Magic</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>Thus far we have been considering chiefly that branch of sympathetic magic which may be called homoeopathic or imitative. Its leading principle, as we have seen, is that like produces like, or, in other words, that an effect resembles its cause. The other great branch of sympathetic magic, which I have called Contagious Magic, proceeds upon the notion that things which have once been conjoined must remain ever afterwards, even when quite dissevered from each other, in such a sympathetic relation that whatever is done to the one must similarly affect the other.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-630" id="noteref-1-1-630" epub:type="noteref">630</a> Thus the logical basis of Contagious Magic, like that of Homoeopathic Magic, is a mistaken association of ideas; its physical basis, if we may speak of such a thing, like the physical basis of Homoeopathic Magic, is a material medium of some sort which, like the ether of modern physics, is assumed to unite distant objects and to convey impressions from one to the other. The most familiar example of Contagious Magic is the magical sympathy which is supposed to exist between a man and any severed portion of his person, as his hair or nails; so that whoever gets possession of human hair or nails may work his will, at any distance, upon the person from whom they were cut. This superstition is worldwide; instances of it in regard to hair and nails will be noticed later on in this work.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-631" id="noteref-1-1-631" epub:type="noteref">631</a> While like other superstitions it has had its absurd and mischievous consequences, it has nevertheless indirectly done much good by furnishing savages with strong, though irrational, motives for observing rules of cleanliness which they might never have adopted on rational grounds. How the superstition has produced this salutary effect will appear from a single instance, which I will give in the words of an experienced observer. Amongst the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain “it is as a rule necessary for the efficiency of a charm that it should contain a part of the person who is to be enchanted (for example, his hair), or a piece of his clothing, or something that stands in some relation to him, such as his excrements, the refuse of his food, his spittle, his footprints, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> All such objects can be employed as <i>panait</i>, that is, as a medium for a <i>papait</i> or charm, consisting of an incantation or murmuring of a certain formula, together with the blowing into the air of some burnt lime which is held in the hand. It need hardly, therefore, be said that the native removes all such objects as well as he can. Thus the cleanliness which is usual in the houses and consists in sweeping the floor carefully every day, is by no means based on a desire for cleanliness and neatness in themselves, but purely on the effort to put out of the way anything that might serve an ill-wisher as a charm.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-632" id="noteref-1-1-632" epub:type="noteref">632</a> I will now illustrate the principles of Contagious Magic by examples, beginning with its application to various parts of the human body.</p>
					<p>Among the Australian tribes it was a common practice to knock out one or more of a boy’s front teeth at those ceremonies of initiation to which every male member had to submit before he could enjoy the rights and privileges of a full-grown man.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-633" id="noteref-1-1-633" epub:type="noteref">633</a> The reason of the practice is obscure; a conjecture on this subject has been hazarded above.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-634" id="noteref-1-1-634" epub:type="noteref">634</a> All that concerns us here is the evidence of a belief that a sympathetic relation continued to exist between the lad and his teeth after the latter had been extracted from his gums. Thus among some of the tribes about the river Darling, in New South Wales, the extracted tooth was placed under the bark of a tree near a river or water-hole; if the bark grew over the tooth, or if the tooth fell into the water, all was well; but if it were exposed and the ants ran over it, the natives believed that the boy would suffer from a disease of the mouth.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-635" id="noteref-1-1-635" epub:type="noteref">635</a> Among the Murring and other tribes of New South Wales the extracted tooth was at first taken care of by an old man, and then passed from one headman to another, until it had gone all round the community, when it came back to the lad’s father, and finally to the lad himself. But however it was thus conveyed from hand to hand, it might on no account be placed in a bag containing magical substances, for to do so would, they believed, put the owner of the tooth in great danger.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-636" id="noteref-1-1-636" epub:type="noteref">636</a> The late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Howitt once acted as custodian of the teeth which had been extracted from some novices at a ceremony of initiation, and the old men earnestly besought him not to carry them in a bag in which they knew that he had some quartz crystals. They declared that if he did so the magic of the crystals would pass into the teeth, and so injure the boys. Nearly a year after <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Howitt’s return from the ceremony he was visited by one of the principal men of the Murring tribe, who had travelled some two hundred and fifty miles from his home to fetch back the teeth. This man explained that he had been sent for them because one of the boys had fallen into ill health, and it was believed that the teeth had received some injury which had affected him. He was assured that the teeth had been kept in a box apart from any substances, like quartz crystals, which could influence them; and he returned home bearing the teeth with him carefully wrapt up and concealed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-637" id="noteref-1-1-637" epub:type="noteref">637</a> In the Dieri tribe of South Australia the teeth knocked out at initiation were bound up in emu feathers, and kept by the boy’s father or his next-of-kin until the mouth had healed, and even for long afterwards. Then the father, accompanied by a few old men, performed a ceremony for the purpose of taking all the supposed life out of the teeth. He made a low rumbling noise without uttering any words, blew two or three times with his mouth, and jerked the teeth through his hand to some little distance. After that he buried them about eighteen inches under ground. The jerking movement was meant to show that he thereby took all the life out of the teeth. Had he failed to do so, the boy would, in the opinion of the natives, have been liable to an ulcerated and wry mouth, impediment in speech, and ultimately a distorted face.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-638" id="noteref-1-1-638" epub:type="noteref">638</a> This ceremony is interesting as a rare instance of an attempt to break the sympathetic link between a man and a severed part of himself by rendering the part insensitive.</p>
					<p>The Basutos are careful to conceal their extracted teeth, lest these should fall into the hands of certain mythical beings called <i>baloi</i>, who haunt graves, and could harm the owner of the tooth by working magic on it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-639" id="noteref-1-1-639" epub:type="noteref">639</a> In Sussex some forty years ago a maidservant remonstrated strongly against the throwing away of children’s cast teeth, affirming that should they be found and gnawed by any animal, the child’s new tooth would be, for all the world, like the teeth of the animal that had bitten the old one. In proof of this she named old Master Simmons, who had a very large pig’s tooth in his upper jaw, a personal defect that he always averred was caused by his mother, who threw away one of his cast teeth by accident into the hog’s trough.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-640" id="noteref-1-1-640" epub:type="noteref">640</a> A similar belief has led to practices intended, on the principles of homoeopathic magic, to replace old teeth by new and better ones. Thus in many parts of the world it is customary to put extracted teeth in some place where they will be found by a mouse or a rat, in the hope that, through the sympathy which continues to subsist between them and their former owner, his other teeth may acquire the same firmness and excellence as the teeth of these rodents. Thus in Germany it is said to be an almost universal maxim among the people that when you have had a tooth taken out you should insert it in a mouse’s hole. To do so with a child’s milk-tooth which has fallen out will prevent the child from having toothache. Or you should go behind the stove and throw your tooth backwards over your head, saying, “Mouse, give me your iron tooth; I will give you my bone tooth.” After that your other teeth will remain good. German children say, “Mouse, mouse, come out and bring me out a new tooth”; or “Mouse, I give you a little bone; give me a little stone”; or “Mouse, there is an old tooth for you; make me a new one.” In Bavaria they say that if this ceremony be observed the child’s second teeth will be as white as the teeth of mice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-641" id="noteref-1-1-641" epub:type="noteref">641</a> Amongst the South Slavonians, too, the child is taught to throw his tooth into a dark corner and say, “Mouse, mouse, there is a bone tooth; give me an iron tooth instead.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-642" id="noteref-1-1-642" epub:type="noteref">642</a> Jewish children in South Russia throw their cast teeth on the roof with the same request to the mouse to give them an iron tooth for a tooth of bone.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-643" id="noteref-1-1-643" epub:type="noteref">643</a> Far away from Europe, at Raratonga, in the Pacific, when a child’s tooth was extracted, the following prayer used to be recited:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Big rat! little rat!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Here is my old tooth.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pray give me a new one.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">Then the tooth was thrown on the thatch of the house, because rats make their nests in the decayed thatch. The reason assigned for invoking the rats on these occasions was that rats’ teeth were the strongest known to the natives.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-644" id="noteref-1-1-644" epub:type="noteref">644</a> In the Seranglao and Gorong archipelagoes, between New Guinea and Celebes, when a child loses his first tooth, he must throw it on the roof, saying, “Mouse, I give you my tooth; give me yours instead.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-645" id="noteref-1-1-645" epub:type="noteref">645</a> In Amboyna the custom is the same, and the form of words is, “Take this tooth, thrown on the roof, as the mouse’s share, and give me a better one instead.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-646" id="noteref-1-1-646" epub:type="noteref">646</a> In the Kei Islands, to the southwest of New Guinea, when a child begins to get his second teeth, he is lifted up to the top of the roof in order that he may there deposit, as an offering to the rats, the tooth which has fallen out. At the same time someone cries aloud, “O rats, here you have his tooth; give him a golden one instead.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-647" id="noteref-1-1-647" epub:type="noteref">647</a> Among the Ilocans of Luzon, in the Philippines, when children’s teeth are loose, they are pulled out with a string and put in a place where rats will be likely to find and drag them away.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-648" id="noteref-1-1-648" epub:type="noteref">648</a> In ancient Mexico, when a child was getting a new tooth, the father or mother used to put the old one in a mouse’s hole, believing that if this precaution were not taken the new tooth would not issue from the gums.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-649" id="noteref-1-1-649" epub:type="noteref">649</a> A different and more barbarous application of the same principle is the Swabian superstition that when a child is teething you should bite off the head of a living mouse, and hang the head round the child’s neck by a string, taking care, however, to make no knot in the string; then the child will teethe easily.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-650" id="noteref-1-1-650" epub:type="noteref">650</a> In Bohemia the treatment prescribed is similar, though there they recommend you to use a red thread and to string three heads of mice on it instead of one.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-651" id="noteref-1-1-651" epub:type="noteref">651</a></p>
					<p>But it is not always a mouse or a rat that brings the child a new and stronger tooth. Apparently any strong-toothed animal will serve the purpose. Thus when his or her tooth drops out, a Singhalese will throw it on the roof, saying, “Squirrel, dear squirrel, take this tooth and give me a dainty tooth.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-652" id="noteref-1-1-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a> In Bohemia a child will sometimes throw its cast tooth behind the stove, asking the fox to give him an iron tooth instead of the bone one.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-653" id="noteref-1-1-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a> In Berlin the teeth of a fox worn as an amulet round a child’s neck make teething easy for him, and ensure that his teeth will be good and lasting.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-654" id="noteref-1-1-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a> Similarly, in order to help a child to cut its teeth, the aborigines of Victoria fastened to its wrist the front tooth of a kangaroo, which the child used as a coral to rub its gums with.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-655" id="noteref-1-1-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a> Again, the beaver can gnaw through the hardest wood. Hence among the Cherokee Indians, when the loosened milk tooth of a child has been pulled out or has dropped out of itself, the child runs round the house with it, repeating four times, “Beaver, put a new tooth into my jaw,” after which he throws the tooth on the roof of the house.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-656" id="noteref-1-1-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a> In Macedonia, a child carefully keeps for a time its first drawn tooth, and then throws it on the roof with the following invocation to the crow:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“O dear crow, here is a tooth of bone,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Take it and give me a tooth of iron instead,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That I may be able to chew beans</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And to crunch dry biscuits.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-657" id="noteref-1-1-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">We can now understand a custom of the Thompson Indians of British Columbia, which the writer who records it is unable to explain. When a child lost its teeth, the father used to take each one as it fell out and to hide it in a piece of raw venison, which he gave to a dog to eat. The animal swallowed the venison and the tooth with it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-658" id="noteref-1-1-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a> Doubtless the custom was intended to ensure that the child’s new teeth should be as strong as those of a dog. In Silesia mothers sometimes swallow their children’s cast teeth in order to save their offspring from toothache. The intention is perhaps to strengthen the weak teeth of the child by the strong teeth of the grown woman.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-659" id="noteref-1-1-659" epub:type="noteref">659</a> Amongst the Warramunga of Central Australia, when a girl’s tooth has been knocked out as a solemn ceremony, it is pounded up and the fragments placed in a piece of flesh, which has to be eaten by the girl’s mother. When the same rite has been performed on a man, his pounded tooth must be eaten in a piece of meat by his mother-in-law.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-660" id="noteref-1-1-660" epub:type="noteref">660</a> Among the heathen Arabs, when a boy’s tooth fell out, he used to take it between his finger and thumb and throw it towards the sun, saying, “Give me a better for it.” After that his teeth were sure to grow straight, and close, and strong. “The sun,” says Tharafah, “gave the lad from his own nursery-ground a tooth like a hailstone, white and polished.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-661" id="noteref-1-1-661" epub:type="noteref">661</a> Thus the reason for throwing the old teeth towards the sun would seem to have been a notion that the sun sends hail, from which it naturally follows that he can send you a tooth as smooth and white and hard as a hailstone. Among the peasants of the Lebanon, when a child loses a milk tooth, he throws it towards the sun, saying, “Sun, sun, take the ass’s tooth and give me the deer’s tooth.” They sometimes say jestingly that the child’s tooth has been carried off by a mouse.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-662" id="noteref-1-1-662" epub:type="noteref">662</a> An Armenian generally buries his extracted teeth at the edge of the hearth with the prayer: “Grandfather, take a dog’s tooth and give me a golden tooth.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-663" id="noteref-1-1-663" epub:type="noteref">663</a> In the light of the preceding examples, we may conjecture that the grandfather here invoked is not so much the soul of a dead ancestor as a mouse or a rat.</p>
					<p>Other parts which are commonly believed to remain in a sympathetic union with the body, after the physical connection has been severed, are the navel-string and the afterbirth, including the placenta. So intimate, indeed, is the union conceived to be, that the fortunes of the individual for good or evil throughout life are often supposed to be bound up with one or other of these portions of his person, so that if his navel-string or afterbirth is preserved and properly treated, he will be prosperous; whereas if it be injured or lost, he will suffer accordingly. Thus among the Maoris, when the navel-string dropped off, the child was carried to a priest to be solemnly named by him. But before the ceremony of naming began, the navel-string was buried in a sacred place and a young sapling was planted over it. Ever afterwards that tree, as it grew, was a <i>tohu oranga</i> or sign of life for the child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-664" id="noteref-1-1-664" epub:type="noteref">664</a> In the Upper Whakatane valley, in the North Island of New Zealand, there is a famous <i>hinau</i> tree, to which the Maoris used to attach the navel-strings of their children; and barren women were in the habit of embracing the tree in the hope of thereby obtaining offspring.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-665" id="noteref-1-1-665" epub:type="noteref">665</a> Again, among the Maoris, “the placenta is named <i>fenua</i>, which word signifies land. It is applied by the natives to the placenta, from their supposing it to be the residence of the child: on being discharged it is immediately buried with great care, as they have the superstitious idea that the priests, if offended, would procure it; and, by praying over it, occasion the death of both mother and child, by ‘praying them to death,’ to use their own expression.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-666" id="noteref-1-1-666" epub:type="noteref">666</a> Again, some of the natives of South Australia regarded the placenta as sacred and carefully put it away out of reach of the dogs,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-667" id="noteref-1-1-667" epub:type="noteref">667</a> doubtless because they thought that harm would come to the child if this part of himself were eaten by the animals. Certain tribes of Western Australia believe that a man swims well or ill, according as his mother at his birth threw the navel-string into water or not.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-668" id="noteref-1-1-668" epub:type="noteref">668</a> Among the Arunta of Central Australia the navel-string is swathed in fur-string and made into a necklace, which is placed round the child’s neck. The necklace is supposed to facilitate the growth of the child, to keep it quiet and contented, and to avert illness generally.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-669" id="noteref-1-1-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a> In the Kaitish tribe of Central Australia the practice and belief are similar.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-670" id="noteref-1-1-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a> In the Warramunga tribe, after the string has hung round the child’s neck for a time, it is given to the wife’s brother, who wears it in his armlet, and who may not see the child till it can walk. In return for the navel-string, the man makes a present of weapons to the infant’s father. When the child can walk, the father gives fur-string to the man, who now comes to the camp, sees the child, and makes another present to the father. After that he keeps the navel-string for some time longer, and finally places it in a hollow tree known only to himself.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-671" id="noteref-1-1-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a> Among the natives on the Pennefather river in Queensland it is believed that a part of the child’s spirit (<i>cho-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></i>) stays in the afterbirth. Hence the grandmother takes the afterbirth away and buries it in the sand. She marks the spot by a number of twigs which she sticks in the ground in a circle, tying their tops together so that the structure resembles a cone. When Anjea, the being who causes conception in women by putting mud babies into their wombs, comes along and sees the place, he takes out the spirit and carries it away to one of his haunts, such as a tree, a hole in a rock, or a lagoon, where it may remain for years. But sometime or other he will put the spirit again into a baby, and it will be born once more into the world.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-672" id="noteref-1-1-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a></p>
					<p>In the Yabim tribe of German New Guinea the mother ties the navel-string to the net in which she carries the child, lest anyone should use the string to the child’s hurt.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-673" id="noteref-1-1-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a> “In some parts of Fiji the navel-string of a male infant is planted together with a coconut, or slip of a breadfruit tree, and the child’s life is supposed to be intimately connected with that of the tree. Moreover, the planting is supposed to have the effect of making the boy a good climber. If the child be a girl, the mother or her sister will take the navel-string to the seawater when she goes out fishing for the first time after the childbirth, and she will throw it into the sea when the nets are stretched in line. Thus the girl will grow up into a skilful fisherwoman. But the queerest use I ever saw the string put to was at Rotuma. There it has become almost obligatory for a young man, who wants the girls to respect him, to make a voyage in a white man’s vessel; and mothers come alongside ships anchored in the roadstead and fasten their boy’s navel-string to the vessel’s chain-plates. This will make sure of a voyage for the child when it has grown up. This, of course, must be a modern development, but it has all the strength of an ancient custom.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-674" id="noteref-1-1-674" epub:type="noteref">674</a> In Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, the navel-string is placed in a shell and then disposed of in such a way as shall best adapt the child for the career which the parents have chosen for him. Thus if they wish to make him a good climber, they will hang the navel-string on a tree.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-675" id="noteref-1-1-675" epub:type="noteref">675</a> In the Gilbert Islands the navel-string is wrapt by the child’s father or adoptive father in a pandanus leaf, and then worn by him as a bracelet for several months. After that he keeps it most carefully in the hut, generally hanging under the ridge-beam. The islanders believe that if the navel-string is thus preserved, the child will become a great warrior if it is a boy, or will make a good match if it is a girl. But should the bracelet be lost before the child is grown up, they expect that the boy will prove a coward in war, and that the girl will make an unfortunate marriage. Hence the most anxious search is made for the missing talisman, and if it is not to be found, weeks will pass before the relations resign themselves to its loss. When the boy has grown to be a youth and has distinguished himself for the first time in war, the bracelet containing the navel-string is taken by the villagers, on a day fixed for the purpose, far out to sea; the adoptive father of the lad throws the bracelet overboard, and all the canoes begin to catch as many fish as they can. The first fish caught, whether large or small, is carefully preserved apart from the rest. Meantime the old women at home have been busy preparing a copious banquet for the fishermen. When the little fleet comes to shore, the old woman who helped at the lad’s birth goes to meet it; the first fish caught is handed to her, and she carries it to the hut. The fish is laid on a new mat, the youth and his mother take their places beside it, and they and it are covered up with another mat. Then the old woman goes round the mat, striking the ground with a short club and murmuring a prayer to the lad’s god to help him henceforth in war, that he may be brave and invulnerable, and that he may turn out a skilful fisherman. The navel-string of a girl, as soon as she is grown up, is thrown into the sea with similar ceremonies; and the ceremony on land is the same except that the old woman’s prayer is naturally different; she asks the girl’s god to grant that she may have a happy marriage and many children. After the mat has been removed, the fish is cooked and eaten by the two; if it is too large to be eaten by them alone, the remainder is consumed by friends and relations. These ceremonies are only observed for the children of wealthy parents, who can defray the cost. In the case of a child of poorer parents the bracelet containing the navel-string simply hangs up till it disappears in one way or another.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-676" id="noteref-1-1-676" epub:type="noteref">676</a></p>
					<p>Among the Galelareese, to the west of New Guinea, the mother sometimes keeps the navel-string till the child is old enough to begin to play. Then she gives it as a plaything to the little one, who may take it away; otherwise the child would be idiotic. But others plant the navel-string with a banana-bush or a coconut.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-677" id="noteref-1-1-677" epub:type="noteref">677</a> The Kei islanders, to the southwest of New Guinea, regard the navel-string as the brother or sister of the child, according as the infant is a boy or a girl. They put it in a pot with ashes, and set it in the branches of a tree, that it may keep a watchful eye on the fortunes of its comrade.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-678" id="noteref-1-1-678" epub:type="noteref">678</a> In the Babar Archipelago, between New Guinea and Celebes, the placenta is mixed with ashes and put in a small basket, which seven women, each of them armed with a sword, hang up on a tree of a particular kind (<i>Citrus hystrix</i>). The women carry swords for the purpose of frightening the evil spirits; otherwise these mischievous beings might get hold of the placenta and make the child sick. The navel-string is kept in a little box in the house.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-679" id="noteref-1-1-679" epub:type="noteref">679</a> In the Tenimber and Timorlaut islands the placenta is buried in a basket under a sago or coconut palm, which then becomes the property of the child. But sometimes it is hidden in the forest, or deposited in a hole under the house with an offering of betel.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-680" id="noteref-1-1-680" epub:type="noteref">680</a> In the Watubela islands the placenta is buried under a coconut, <i>mangga</i>, or great fig-tree along with the shell of the coconut, of which the pulp had been used to smear the newborn child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-681" id="noteref-1-1-681" epub:type="noteref">681</a> In many of the islands between New Guinea and Celebes the placenta is put in the branches of a tree, often in the top of one of the highest trees in the neighbourhood. Sometimes the navel-string is deposited along with the placenta in the tree, but often it is kept to be used as medicine or an amulet by the child.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-682" id="noteref-1-1-682" epub:type="noteref">682</a> Thus in Ceram the child sometimes wears the navel-string round its neck as a charm to avert sickness;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-683" id="noteref-1-1-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a> and in the islands of Leti, Moa, and Lakor he carries it as an amulet in war or on a far journey.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-684" id="noteref-1-1-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a> We cannot doubt that the intention of putting the placenta in the top of a tall tree is to keep it, and with it the child, out of harm’s way. In the islands of Saparoea, Haroekoe, and Noessa Laut, to the east of Amboyna, the midwife buries the afterbirth and strews flowers over it. Moreover, resin or a lamp is kept burning for seven or three nights over the buried afterbirth, in order that no harm may come to the child. Some people, however, in these islands solemnly cast the afterbirth into the sea. Being placed in a pot and closely covered up with a piece of white cotton, it is taken out to sea in a boat. A hole is knocked in the pot to allow it to sink in the water. The midwife, who is charged with the duty of heaving the pot and its contents overboard, must look straight ahead; if she were to glance to the right or left the child whose afterbirth is in the pot would squint. And the man who rows or steers the boat must make her keep a straight course, otherwise the child would grow up a gadabout. Before the pot is flung into the sea, the midwife disengages the piece of white cotton in which it is wrapt, and this cloth she takes straight back to the house and covers the baby with it. In these islands it is thought that a child born with a caul will enjoy in later years the gift of second sight⁠—that is, that he will be able to see things which are hidden from common eyes, such as devils and evil spirits. But if his parents desire to prevent him from exercising this uncanny power, they can do so. In that case the midwife must dry the caul in the sun, steep it in water, and then wash the child with the water thrice; further, when the child is a little older, she must grind the caul to powder, and give the child the powder to eat with its pap. Some people keep the caul; and if the child falls ill, it is given water to drink in which the caul has been steeped.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-685" id="noteref-1-1-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a> Similarly in the Luang-Sermata islands a child born with a caul is counted lucky, and can perceive and recognise the spirits of his ancestors.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-686" id="noteref-1-1-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a> A caul, it may be said, is merely the fœtal membrane which usually forms part of the afterbirth; occasionally a child is born with it wrapt like a hood round its head.</p>
					<p>In Parigi, a kingdom on the coast of Central Celebes, the placenta is laid in a cooking-pot, and one of the mother’s female relations carries the pot wrapt in white cotton and hidden under a petticoat (<i>sarong</i>) to a spot beneath the house or elsewhere, and there she buries it. A coconut is planted near the place. Going and coming the woman is led by another, and must keep her eyes fast shut, for if she looked right or left the child would squint, “because she is at this time closely united with a part of the child, to wit its older brother, in other words the placenta.” On her return to the house she lies down on her sleeping-mat, still with closed eyes, and draws a petticoat over her head, and another woman sprinkles her with water. After that she may get up and open her eyes. The sprinkling with water is intended to sever her sympathetic connection with the child and so prevent her from exercising any influence on it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-687" id="noteref-1-1-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a> Among the Tolalaki of Central Celebes turmeric and other spices are put on the placenta, which is then enclosed in two coconut shells that fit one on the other. These are wrapt in bark-cloth and kept in the house. If the child falls ill, the coconut shells are opened and the placenta examined. Should there be worms in it, they are removed and fresh spices added. When the child has grown big and strong, the placenta is thrown away.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-688" id="noteref-1-1-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a> Among the Toboongkoo of Central Celebes the afterbirth is placed in a rice-pot with various plants, which are intended to preserve it from decay as long as possible; it is then carefully tied up in bark-cloth. A man and a woman of the family carry the placenta away; in doing so they go out and in the house four times, and each time they enter they kiss the child, but they take care not to look to the right or the left, for otherwise the child would squint. Some bury the placenta, others hang it on a tree. If the child is unwell, they dig up the placenta or take it down from the tree, and lay bananas, rice of four sorts, and a lighted taper beside it. Having done so, they hang it up on a tree if it was previously buried; but they bury it if it was formerly hung up.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-689" id="noteref-1-1-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a> The Tomori of Central Celebes wash the afterbirth, put it in a rice-pot, and bury it under the house. Great care is taken that no water or spittle falls on the place. For a few days the afterbirth is sometimes fed with rice and eggs, which are laid on the spot where it is buried. Afterwards the people cease to trouble themselves about it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-690" id="noteref-1-1-690" epub:type="noteref">690</a> In southern Celebes they call the navel-string and afterbirth the two brothers or sisters of the child. When the infant happens to be a prince or princess, the navel-string and afterbirth are placed with salt and tamarind in a new rice-pot, which is then enveloped in a fine robe and tightly corded up to prevent the evil spirits from making off with the pair of brothers or sisters. For the same reason a light is kept burning all night, and twice a day rice is rubbed on the edge of the pot, for the purpose, as the people say, of giving the child’s little brothers or sisters something to eat. After a while this feeding, as it is called, takes place at rarer intervals, and when the mother has been again brought to bed it is discontinued altogether. On the ninth day after the birth a number of coconuts are planted, with much ceremony, in a square enclosure, and the water which was used in cleansing the afterbirth and navel-string is poured upon them. These coconuts are called the contemporaries of the child and grow up with him. When the planting is done, the rice-pot with the navel-string and afterbirth is carried back and set beside the bed of the young prince or princess, and when his royal highness is carried out to take the air the rice-pot with his two “brothers” goes out with him, swathed in a robe of state and screened from the sun by an umbrella. If the prince or princess should die, the afterbirth and navel-string are buried. Among common people in South Celebes these parts of the infant are generally buried immediately after the birth, or they are sunk in the deep sea, or hung in a rice-pot on a tree.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-691" id="noteref-1-1-691" epub:type="noteref">691</a></p>
					<p>In the island of Timor the placenta is called the child’s companion and treated accordingly. The midwife puts it in an earthen pot and covers it with ashes from the hearth. After standing thus three days it is taken away and buried by a person who must observe silence in discharging this duty.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-692" id="noteref-1-1-692" epub:type="noteref">692</a> In Savou, a small island to the southwest of Timor, the afterbirth is filled with native herbs, and having been deposited in a new pot, which has never before been used, is buried under the house to keep off evil spirits. Or it is put in a new basket and hung in a high toddy palm to fertilise it, or thrown into the sea to secure a good catch of fish. The person who thus disposes of the afterbirth may not look to the right or the left; he must be joyous and, if possible, go singing on his way. If it is to be hung on a tree, he must climb nimbly up, in order that the child may always be lucky. These islanders ascribe a similar fertilising virtue to a caul. It is dried and carefully kept in a box. When rice-stalks turn black and the ears refuse to set, a man will take the box containing the caul and run several times round the rice-field, in order that the wind may waft the genial influence of the caul over the rice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-693" id="noteref-1-1-693" epub:type="noteref">693</a> In Rotti, an island to the south of Timor, the navel-string is put in a small satchel made of leaves, and if the father of the child is not himself going on a voyage, he entrusts the bag to one of his seafaring friends and charges him to throw it away in the open sea with the express wish that, when the child grows up and has to sail to other islands, he may escape the perils of the deep. But the business of girls in these islands does not lie in the great waters, and hence their navel-strings receive a different treatment. It is their task to go afishing daily, when the tide is out, on the coral reefs which ring the islands. So when the mother is herself again, she repairs with the little satchel to the reef where she is wont to fish. Acting the part of a priestess she there eats one or two small bagfuls of boiled rice on the spot where she intends to deposit the dried navel-string of her baby daughter, taking care to leave a few grains of rice in the bags. Then she ties the precious satchel and the nearly empty rice-bags to a stick and fastens it among the stones of the reef, generally on its outer edge, within sight and sound of the breaking waves. In doing so she utters a wish that this ceremony may guard her daughter from the perils and dangers that beset her on the reef⁠—for example, that no crocodile may issue from the lagoon and eat her up, and that the sharp corals and broken shells may not wound her feet.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-694" id="noteref-1-1-694" epub:type="noteref">694</a></p>
					<p>In the island of Flores the placenta is put in an earthen pot, along with some rice and betel, and buried by the father in the neighbourhood of the house, or else preserved in one of the highest trees.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-695" id="noteref-1-1-695" epub:type="noteref">695</a> The natives of Bali, an island to the east of Java, believe firmly that the afterbirth is the child’s brother or sister, and they bury it in the courtyard in the half of a coconut from which the kernel has not been removed. For forty days afterwards a light is burned, and food, water, and betel deposited on the spot,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-696" id="noteref-1-1-696" epub:type="noteref">696</a> doubtless in order to feed the baby’s little brother or sister, and to guard him or her from evil spirits. In Java the afterbirth is also called the brother or sister of the infant; it is wrapt in white cotton, put in a new pot or a coconut shell, and buried by the father beside the door, outside the house if the child is a boy, but inside the house if the child is a girl. Every evening until the child’s navel has healed a lamp is lit over the spot where the afterbirth is buried. If the afterbirth hangs in a rice-pot in the house, as the practice is with some people, the lamp burns under the place where the rice-pot is suspended. The purpose of the light is to ward off demons, to whose machinations the child and its supposed brother or sister are at this season especially exposed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-697" id="noteref-1-1-697" epub:type="noteref">697</a> If the child is a boy, a piece of paper inscribed with the alphabet is deposited in the pot with his placenta, in order that he may be smart at his learning; if the child is a girl, a needle and thread are deposited in the pot, that she may be a good sempstress, and water with flowers in it is poured on the spot where the placenta is buried, in order that the child may always be healthy; for many Javanese think that if the placenta is not properly honoured, the child will never be well.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-698" id="noteref-1-1-698" epub:type="noteref">698</a> Sometimes, however, women in the interior of Java allow the placenta, surrounded with fruits and flowers and illuminated by little lamps, to float down the river in the dusk of the evening as an offering to the crocodiles, or rather to the ancestors whose souls are believed to lodge in these animals.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-699" id="noteref-1-1-699" epub:type="noteref">699</a></p>
					<p>In Mandeling, a district on the west coast of Sumatra, the afterbirth is washed and buried under the house or put in an earthenware pot, which is carefully shut up and thrown into the river. This is done to avert the supposed unfavourable influence of the afterbirth on the child, whose hands or feet, for example, might be chilled by it. When the navel-string drops off, it is preserved to be used as a medicine when its former owner is ill.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-700" id="noteref-1-1-700" epub:type="noteref">700</a> In Mandeling, too, the midwife prefers to cut the navel-string with a piece of a flute on which she has first blown, for then the child will be sure to have a fine voice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-701" id="noteref-1-1-701" epub:type="noteref">701</a> Among the Minangkabau people of Sumatra the placenta is put in a new earthenware pot, which is then carefully closed with a banana leaf to prevent the ants and other insects from coming at it; for if they did, the child would be sickly and given to squalling.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-702" id="noteref-1-1-702" epub:type="noteref">702</a> In Central Sumatra the placenta is wrapt in white cotton, deposited in a basket or a calabash, and buried in the courtyard before the house or under a rice-barn. The hole is dug by a kinsman or kinswoman according as the baby is a boy or a girl. Over the hole is placed a stone from the hearth, and beside it a wooden spoon is stuck in the ground. Both stone and spoon are sprinkled with the juice of a citron. During the ceremony <i>koemajen</i> is burned and a shot fired. For three evenings afterwards candles are lighted at the spot,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-703" id="noteref-1-1-703" epub:type="noteref">703</a> doubtless to keep off demons. Among the Battas of Sumatra, as among so many other peoples of the Indian Archipelago, the placenta passes for the child’s younger brother or sister, the sex being determined by the sex of the child, and it is buried under the house. According to the Battas it is bound up with the child’s welfare, and seems, in fact, to be the seat of the transferable soul, of whose wanderings outside of the body we shall hear something later on.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-704" id="noteref-1-1-704" epub:type="noteref">704</a> The Karo Battas even affirm that of a man’s two souls it is the true soul that lives with the placenta under the house; that is the soul, they say, which begets children.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-705" id="noteref-1-1-705" epub:type="noteref">705</a></p>
					<p>In Pasir, a district of eastern Borneo, the afterbirth is carefully treated and kept in an earthen pot or basket in the house until the remains of the navel-string have fallen off. All the time it is in the house candles are burned and a little food is placed beside the pot. When the navel-string has fallen off, it is placed with the placenta in the pot, and the two are buried in the ground near the house. The reason why the people take this care of the afterbirth is that they believe it able to cause the child all kinds of sickness and mishaps.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-706" id="noteref-1-1-706" epub:type="noteref">706</a> The Malas, a low Telugu caste of Southern India, bury the placenta in a pot with leaves in some convenient place, generally in the back yard, lest dogs or other animals should carry it off; for if that were to happen they fancy that the child would be of a wandering disposition.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-707" id="noteref-1-1-707" epub:type="noteref">707</a> The Khasis of Assam keep the placenta in a pot in the house until the child has been formally named. When that ceremony is over, the father waves the pot containing the placenta thrice over the child’s head, and then hangs it to a tree outside of the village.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-708" id="noteref-1-1-708" epub:type="noteref">708</a> In some Malayo-Siamese families of the Patani States it is customary to bury the afterbirth under a banana-tree, the condition of which is thenceforth regarded as ominous of the child’s fate for good or ill.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-709" id="noteref-1-1-709" epub:type="noteref">709</a> A Chinese medical work prescribes that “the placenta should be stored away in a felicitous spot under the salutary influences of the sky or the moon, deep in the ground, and with earth piled up over it carefully, in order that the child may be ensured a long life. If it is devoured by a swine or dog, the child loses its intellect; if insects or ants eat it, the child becomes scrofulous; if crows or magpies swallow it, the child will have an abrupt or violent death; if it is cast into the fire, the child incurs running sores.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-710" id="noteref-1-1-710" epub:type="noteref">710</a> The Japanese preserve the navel-string most carefully and bury it with the dead in the grave.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-711" id="noteref-1-1-711" epub:type="noteref">711</a></p>
					<p>Among the Gallas of East Africa the navel-string is carefully kept, sewn up in leather, and serves as an amulet for female camels, which then become the child’s property, together with all the young they give birth to.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-712" id="noteref-1-1-712" epub:type="noteref">712</a> The Baganda believe that every person is born with a double, and this double they identify with the afterbirth, which they regard as a second child. Further, they think that the afterbirth has a ghost, and that the ghost is in that portion of the navel-string which remains attached to the child after birth. This ghost must be preserved if the child is to be healthy. Hence when the navel-string drops off, it is rubbed with butter, swathed in bark-cloth, and kept through life under the name of “the twin” (<i>mulongo</i>). The afterbirth is wrapt up in plantain leaves and buried by the child’s mother at the root of a plantain tree, where it is protected against wild beasts. If the child be a boy, the tree chosen is of the kind whose fruit is made into beer; if the child be a girl, the tree is of the kind whose fruit is eaten. The plantain tree at whose root the afterbirth is buried becomes sacred until the fruit has ripened and been used. Only the father’s mother may come near it and dig about it; all other people are kept from it by a rope of plantain fibre which is tied from tree to tree in a circle round about the sacred plantain. All the child’s secretions are thrown by the mother at the root of the tree; when the fruit is ripe, the father’s mother cuts it and makes it into beer or cooks it, according to the sex of the child, and the relatives of the father’s clan then come and partake of the sacred feast. After the meal the father must go in to his own wife, for should he neglect to do so, and should some other member of the clan have sexual relations with his wife first, the child’s spirit would leave it and go into the other woman. Further, the navel-string plays a part at the ceremony of naming a child, the object of which among the Baganda is to determine whether the child is legitimate or not. For this purpose the navel-string (the so-called “twin”) is dropped into a bowl containing a mixture of beer, milk, and water; if it floats, the child is legitimate and the clan accepts it as a member; if it sinks, the child is disowned by the clan and the mother is punished for adultery. Afterwards the navel-string or “twin” (<i>mulongo</i>) is either kept by the clan or buried along with the afterbirth at the root of the plantain tree. Such are the customs observed with regard to the afterbirth and navel-string of Baganda commoners. The king’s navel-string or “twin,” wrapt in bark-cloths and decorated with beads, is treated like a person and confided to the care of the Kimbugwe, the second officer of the country, who has a special house built for it within his enclosure. Every month, when the new moon first appears in the sky, the Kimbugwe carries the bundle containing the “twin” in procession, with fife and drums playing, to the king, while the royal drum is beating in the royal enclosure. The king examines it and hands it back to him. After that, the minister returns the precious bundle to its own house in his enclosure and places it in the doorway, where it remains all night. Next morning it is taken from its wrappings, smeared with butter, and again set in the doorway until the evening, when it is swathed once more in its bark-cloths and restored to its proper resting-place. After the king’s death his “twin” is deposited, along with his jawbone, in the huge hut which forms his temple. The spirit of the dead king is supposed to dwell in these two relics; they are placed on the dais when he wishes to hold his court and when he is oracularly consulted on special occasions.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-713" id="noteref-1-1-713" epub:type="noteref">713</a></p>
					<p>The Incas of Peru preserved the navel-string with the greatest care, and gave it to the child to suck whenever it fell ill.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-714" id="noteref-1-1-714" epub:type="noteref">714</a> In ancient Mexico they used to give a boy’s navel-string to soldiers, to be buried by them on a field of battle, in order that the boy might thus acquire a passion for war. But the navel-string of a girl was buried beside the domestic hearth, because this was believed to inspire her with a love of home and a taste for cooking and baking.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-715" id="noteref-1-1-715" epub:type="noteref">715</a> Algonquin women hung the navel-string round the child’s neck; if he lost it, they thought the child would be stupid and spiritless.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-716" id="noteref-1-1-716" epub:type="noteref">716</a> Among the Thompson Indians of British Columbia the navel-string was sewed up by the mother in a piece of buckskin embroidered with hair, quills, or beads. It was then tied to the broad buckskin band which extended round the head of the cradle on the outside. Many thongs hung from it, each carrying fawn’s hoofs and beads that jingled when the cradle was moved. If the navel-string were lost, they looked on it as a calamity, for they believed that in after years the child would become foolish or would be lost in the chase or on a journey.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-717" id="noteref-1-1-717" epub:type="noteref">717</a> Among the Kwakiutl Indians of British Columbia the afterbirth of girls is buried at high-water mark, in the belief that this will render them expert at digging for clam. The afterbirth of boys is sometimes exposed at places where ravens will eat it, because the boys will thus acquire the raven’s prophetic vision. The same Indians are persuaded that the navel-string may be the means of imparting a variety of accomplishments to its original owner. Thus, if it is fastened to a dancing mask, which is then worn by a skilful dancer, the child will dance well. If it is attached to a knife, which is thereafter used by a cunning carver, the child will carve well. Again, if the parents wish their son to sing beautifully, they tie his navel-string to the baton of a singing-master. Then the boy calls on the singing-master every morning while the artist is eating his breakfast. The votary of the Muses thereupon takes his baton and moves it twice down the right side and twice down the left side of the boy’s body, after which he gives the lad some of his food to eat. That is an infallible way of making the boy a beautiful singer.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-718" id="noteref-1-1-718" epub:type="noteref">718</a> Among the Cherokees the navel-string of an infant girl is buried under the corn mortar, in order that the girl may grow up to be a good baker; but the navel-string of a boy is hung up on a tree in the woods, in order that he may be a hunter. Among the Kiowas the navel-string of a girl is sewn up in a small beaded pouch and worn by her at her belt as she grows to womanhood. If the girl’s mother ever sells the belt and pouch, she is careful to extract the navel-string from the pouch before the bargain is struck. Should the child die, the pouch containing her navel-string would be fastened to a stick and set up over her grave.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-719" id="noteref-1-1-719" epub:type="noteref">719</a></p>
					<p>Even in Europe many people still believe that a person’s destiny is more or less bound up with that of his navel-string or afterbirth. Thus in Rhenish Bavaria the navel-string is kept for a while wrapt up in a piece of old linen, and then cut or pricked to pieces according as the child is a boy or a girl, in order that he or she may grow up to be a skilful workman or a good sempstress.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-720" id="noteref-1-1-720" epub:type="noteref">720</a> In Berlin the midwife commonly delivers the dried navel-string to the father with a strict injunction to preserve it carefully, for so long as it is kept the child will live and thrive and be free from sickness.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-721" id="noteref-1-1-721" epub:type="noteref">721</a> In Beauce and Perche the people are careful to throw the navel-string neither into water nor into fire, believing that if that were done the child would be drowned or burned.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-722" id="noteref-1-1-722" epub:type="noteref">722</a> Among the Ruthenians of Bukowina and Galicia, the owner of a cow sometimes endeavours to increase its milk by throwing its afterbirth into a spring, “in order that, just as the water flows from the spring, so milk may flow in abundance from the udders of the cow.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-723" id="noteref-1-1-723" epub:type="noteref">723</a> Some German peasants think that the afterbirth of a cow must be hung up in an apple-tree, otherwise the cow would not have a calf next year.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-724" id="noteref-1-1-724" epub:type="noteref">724</a> Similarly at Cleveland in Yorkshire, when a mare foals, it is the custom to hang up the placenta in a tree, particularly in a thorn-tree, in order to secure luck with the foal. “Should the birth take place in the fields, this suspension is most carefully attended to, while as for the requirements of such events at the homestead, in not a few instances there is a certain tree not far from the farm-buildings still specially marked out for the reception of these peculiar pendants. In one instance lately, I heard of a larch tree so devoted, but admittedly in default of the thorn; the old thorn-tree long employed for the purpose having died out.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-725" id="noteref-1-1-725" epub:type="noteref">725</a> Again, in Europe children born with a caul are considered lucky;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-726" id="noteref-1-1-726" epub:type="noteref">726</a> in Holland, as in the East Indies, they can see ghosts.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-727" id="noteref-1-1-727" epub:type="noteref">727</a> The Icelanders also hold that a child born with a caul will afterwards possess the gift of second sight, that he will never be harmed by sorcery, and will be victorious in every contest he undertakes, provided he has the caul dried and carries it with him.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-728" id="noteref-1-1-728" epub:type="noteref">728</a> This latter belief explains why both in ancient and modern times advocates have bought cauls with the hope of winning their cases by means of them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-729" id="noteref-1-1-729" epub:type="noteref">729</a> Probably they thought that the spirit in the caul would prove an invincible ally to the person who had purchased its services. In like manner the aborigines of Central Australia believe that their sacred sticks or stones (<i>churinga</i>) are intimately associated with the spirits of the dead men to whom they belonged, and that in a fight a man who carries one of these sticks or stones will certainly vanquish an adversary who has no such talisman.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-730" id="noteref-1-1-730" epub:type="noteref">730</a> Further, it is an ancient belief in Iceland that the child’s guardian spirit or a part of its soul has its seat in the chorion or foetal membrane, which usually forms part of the afterbirth, but is known as the caul when the child happens to be born with it. Hence the chorion was itself known as the <i>fylgia</i> or guardian spirit. It might not be thrown away under the open sky, lest demons should get hold of it and work the child harm thereby, or lest wild beasts should eat it up. It might not be burned, for if it were burned the child would have no <i>fylgia</i>, which would be as bad as to have no shadow. Formerly it was customary to bury the chorion under the threshold, where the mother stepped over it daily when she rose from bed. If the chorion was thus treated, the man had in after life a guardian spirit in the shape of a bear, an eagle, a wolf, an ox, or a boar. The guardian spirits of cunning men and wizards had the shape of a fox, while those of beautiful women appeared as swans. In all these forms the guardian spirits formerly announced their coming and presented themselves to the persons to whom they belonged; but nowadays both the belief and the custom have changed in many respects.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-731" id="noteref-1-1-731" epub:type="noteref">731</a></p>
					<p>Thus in many parts of the world the navel-string, or more commonly the afterbirth, is regarded as a living being, the brother or sister of the infant, or as the material object in which the guardian spirit of the child or part of its soul resides. This latter belief we have found among the aborigines of Queensland, the Battas of Sumatra, and the Norsemen of Iceland. In accordance with such beliefs it has been customary to preserve these parts of the body, at least for a time, with the utmost care, lest the character, the fate, or even the life of the person to whom they belong should be endangered by their injury or loss. Further, the sympathetic connection supposed to exist between a person and his afterbirth or navel-string comes out very clearly in the widespread custom of treating the afterbirth or navel-string in ways which are supposed to influence for life the character and career of the person, making him, if it is a man, a swift runner, a nimble climber, a strong swimmer, a skilful hunter, or a brave soldier, and making her, if it is a woman, an expert fisher, a cunning sempstress, a good cook or baker, and so forth. Thus the beliefs and usages concerned with the afterbirth or placenta, and to a less extent with the navel-string, present a remarkable parallel to the widespread doctrine of the transferable or external soul and the customs founded on it. Hence it is hardly rash to conjecture that the resemblance is no mere chance coincidence, but that in the afterbirth or placenta we have a physical basis (not necessarily the only one) for the theory and practice of the external soul. The consideration of that subject is reserved for a later part of this work.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-732" id="noteref-1-1-732" epub:type="noteref">732</a></p>
					<p>A curious application of the doctrine of contagious magic is the relation commonly believed to exist between a wounded man and the agent of the wound, so that whatever is subsequently done by or to the agent must correspondingly affect the patient either for good or evil. Thus Pliny tells us that if you have wounded a man and are sorry for it, you have only to spit on the hand that gave the wound, and the pain of the sufferer will be instantly alleviated.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-733" id="noteref-1-1-733" epub:type="noteref">733</a> In Melanesia, if a man’s friends get possession of the arrow which wounded him, they keep it in a damp place or in cool leaves, for then the inflammation will be trifling and will soon subside. Meantime the enemy who shot the arrow is hard at work to aggravate the wound by all the means in his power. For this purpose he and his friends drink hot and burning juices and chew irritating leaves, for this will clearly inflame and irritate the wound. Further, they keep the bow near the fire to make the wound which it has inflicted hot; and for the same reason they put the arrowhead, if it has been recovered, into the fire. Moreover, they are careful to keep the bowstring taut and to twang it occasionally, for this will cause the wounded man to suffer from tension of the nerves and spasms of tetanus.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-734" id="noteref-1-1-734" epub:type="noteref">734</a> Similarly when a Kwakiutl Indian of British Columbia had bitten a piece out of an enemy’s arm, he used to drink hot water afterwards for the purpose of thereby inflaming the wound in his foe’s body.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-735" id="noteref-1-1-735" epub:type="noteref">735</a> Among the Lkuñgen Indians of the same region it is a rule that an arrow, or any other weapon that has wounded a man, must be hidden by his friends, who have to be careful not to bring it near the fire till the wound is healed. If a knife or an arrow which is still covered with a man’s blood were thrown into the fire, the wounded man would suffer very much.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-736" id="noteref-1-1-736" epub:type="noteref">736</a> In the Yerkla-mining tribe of southeastern Australia it is thought that if anyone but the medicine-man touches the flint knife with which a boy has been subincised, the boy will thereby be made very ill. So seriously is this belief held that if the lad chanced thereafter to fall sick and die, the man who had touched the knife would be killed.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-737" id="noteref-1-1-737" epub:type="noteref">737</a> “It is constantly received and avouched,” says Bacon, “that the anointing of the weapon that maketh the wound will heal the wound itself. In this experiment, upon the relation of men of credit (though myself, as yet, am not fully inclined to believe it), you shall note the points following: first, the ointment wherewith this is done is made of diverse ingredients, whereof the strangest and hardest to come by are the moss upon the skull of a dead man unburied, and the fats of a boar and a bear killed in the act of generation.” The precious ointment compounded out of these and other ingredients was applied, as the philosopher explains, not to the wound but to the weapon, and that even though the injured man was at a great distance and knew nothing about it. The experiment, he tells us, had been tried of wiping the ointment off the weapon without the knowledge of the person hurt, with the result that he was presently in a great rage of pain until the weapon was anointed again. Moreover, “it is affirmed that if you cannot get the weapon, yet if you put an instrument of iron or wood resembling the weapon into the wound, whereby it bleedeth, the anointing of that instrument will serve and work the effect.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-738" id="noteref-1-1-738" epub:type="noteref">738</a> Remedies of the sort which Bacon deemed worthy of his attention are still in vogue in the eastern counties of England. Thus in Suffolk if a man cuts himself with a billhook or a scythe he always takes care to keep the weapon bright, and oils it to prevent the wound from festering. If he runs a thorn or, as he calls it, a bush into his hand, he oils or greases the extracted thorn. A man came to a doctor with an inflamed hand, having run a thorn into it while he was hedging. On being told that the hand was festering, he remarked, “That didn’t ought to, for I greased the bush well arter I pulled it out.” If a horse wounds its foot by treading on a nail, a Suffolk groom will invariably preserve the nail, clean it, and grease it every day, to prevent the foot from festering. Arguing in the same way, a Suffolk woman, whose sister had burnt her face with a flatiron, observed that “the face would never heal till the iron had been put out of the way; and even if it did heal, it would be sure to break out again every time the iron was heated.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-739" id="noteref-1-1-739" epub:type="noteref">739</a> At Norwich in June 1902 a woman named Matilda Henry accidentally ran a nail into her foot. Without examining the wound, or even removing her stocking, she caused her daughter to grease the nail, saying that if this were done no harm would come of the hurt. A few days afterwards she died of lockjaw.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-740" id="noteref-1-1-740" epub:type="noteref">740</a> Similarly Cambridgeshire labourers think that if a horse has run a nail into its foot, it is necessary to grease the nail with lard or oil and put it away in some safe place, or the horse will not recover. A few years ago a veterinary surgeon was sent for to attend a horse which had ripped its side open on the hinge of a farm gatepost. On arriving at the farm he found that nothing had been done to the wounded horse, but that a man was busy trying to pry the hinge out of the gatepost in order that it might be greased and put away, which, in the opinion of the Cambridge wiseacres, would conduce to the recovery of the animal.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-741" id="noteref-1-1-741" epub:type="noteref">741</a> Similarly Essex rustics opine that, if a man has been stabbed with a knife, it is essential to his recovery that the knife should be greased and laid across the bed on which the sufferer is lying.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-742" id="noteref-1-1-742" epub:type="noteref">742</a> So in Bavaria you are directed to anoint a linen rag with grease and tie it on the edge of the axe that cut you, taking care to keep the sharp edge upwards. As the grease on the axe dries, your wound heals.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-743" id="noteref-1-1-743" epub:type="noteref">743</a> Similarly in the Harz mountains they say that if you cut yourself, you ought to smear the knife or the scissors with fat and put the instrument away in a dry place in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. As the knife dries, the wound heals.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-744" id="noteref-1-1-744" epub:type="noteref">744</a> Other people, however, in Germany say that you should stick the knife in some damp place in the ground, and that your hurt will heal as the knife rusts.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-745" id="noteref-1-1-745" epub:type="noteref">745</a> Others again, in Bavaria, recommend you to smear the axe or whatever it is with blood and put it under the eaves.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-746" id="noteref-1-1-746" epub:type="noteref">746</a></p>
					<p>The train of reasoning which thus commends itself to English and German rustics, in common with the savages of Melanesia and America, is carried a step further by the aborigines of Central Australia, who conceive that under certain circumstances the near relations of a wounded man must grease themselves, restrict their diet, and regulate their behaviour in other ways in order to ensure his recovery. Thus when a lad has been circumcised and the wound is not yet healed, his mother may not eat opossum, or a certain kind of lizard, or carpet snake, or any kind of fat, for otherwise she would retard the healing of the boy’s wound. Every day she greases her digging-sticks and never lets them out of her sight; at night she sleeps with them close to her head. No one is allowed to touch them. Every day also she rubs her body all over with grease, as in some way this is believed to help her son’s recovery.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-747" id="noteref-1-1-747" epub:type="noteref">747</a> Another refinement of the same principle is due to the ingenuity of the German peasant. It is said that when one of his pigs or sheep breaks its leg, a farmer of Rhenish Bavaria or Hesse will bind up the leg of a chair with bandages and splints in due form. For some days thereafter no one may sit on that chair, move it, or knock up against it; for to do so would pain the injured pig or sheep and hinder the cure.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-748" id="noteref-1-1-748" epub:type="noteref">748</a> In this last case it is clear that we have passed wholly out of the region of contagious magic and into the region of homoeopathic or imitative magic; the chair-leg, which is treated instead of the beast’s leg, in no sense belongs to the animal, and the application of bandages to it is a mere simulation of the treatment which a more rational surgery would bestow on the real patient.</p>
					<p>The sympathetic connection supposed to exist between a man and the weapon which has wounded him is probably founded on the notion that the blood on the weapon continues to feel with the blood in his body. For a like reason the Papuans of Tumleo, an island off German New Guinea, are careful to throw into the sea the bloody bandages with which their wounds have been dressed, for they fear that if these rags fell into the hands of an enemy he might injure them magically thereby. Once when a man with a wound in his mouth, which bled constantly, came to the missionaries to be treated, his faithful wife took great pains to collect all the blood and cast it into the sea.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-749" id="noteref-1-1-749" epub:type="noteref">749</a> Strained and unnatural as this idea may seem to us, it is perhaps less so than the belief that magic sympathy is maintained between a person and his clothes, so that whatever is done to the clothes will be felt by the man himself, even though he may be far away at the time. That is why these same Papuans of Tumleo search most anxiously for the smallest scrap which they may have lost of their scanty garments,​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-750" id="noteref-1-1-750" epub:type="noteref">750</a> and why other Papuans, travelling through the thick forest, will stop and carefully scrape from a bough any clot of red pomade which may have adhered to it from their greasy heads.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-751" id="noteref-1-1-751" epub:type="noteref">751</a> In the Wotjobaluk tribe of Victoria a wizard would sometimes get hold of a man’s opossum rug and tie it up with some small spindle-shaped pieces of casuarina wood, on which he had made certain marks, such as likenesses of his victim and of a poisonous snake. This bundle he would then roast slowly in the fire, and as he did so the man who had owned the opossum rug would fall sick. Should the patient suspect what was happening, he would send to the wizard and beg him to let him have the rug back. If the wizard consented, “he would give the thing back, telling the sick man’s friends to put it in water, so as to wash the fire out.” In such cases, we are told, the sick man would feel cooled and would most likely recover.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-752" id="noteref-1-1-752" epub:type="noteref">752</a> In Tanna, one of the New Hebrides, a man who had a grudge at another and desired his death would try to get possession of a cloth which had touched the sweat of his enemy’s body. If he succeeded, he rubbed the cloth carefully over with the leaves and twigs of a certain tree, rolled and bound cloth, twigs, and leaves into a long sausage-shaped bundle, and burned it slowly in the fire. As the bundle was consumed, the victim fell ill, and when it was reduced to ashes, he died.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-753" id="noteref-1-1-753" epub:type="noteref">753</a> In this last form of enchantment, however, the magical sympathy may be supposed to exist not so much between the man and the cloth as between the man and the sweat which issued from his body. But in other cases of the same sort it seems that the garment by itself is enough to give the sorcerer a hold upon his victim. The witch in Theocritus, while she melted an image or lump of wax in order that her faithless lover might melt with love of her, did not forget to throw into the fire a shred of his cloak which he had dropped in her house.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-754" id="noteref-1-1-754" epub:type="noteref">754</a> In Prussia they say that if you cannot catch a thief, the next best thing you can do is to get hold of a garment which he may have shed in his flight; for it you beat it soundly, the thief will fall sick. This belief is firmly rooted in the popular mind. Some seventy or eighty years ago, in the neighbourhood of Berend, a man was detected trying to steal honey, and fled, leaving his coat behind him. When he heard that the enraged owner of the honey was mauling his lost coat, he was so alarmed that he took to his bed and died.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-755" id="noteref-1-1-755" epub:type="noteref">755</a> But in Germany it is not every stick that is good enough to beat an absent man with. It should be a hazel rod cut before sunrise on Good Friday. Some say it should be a one-year-old hazel-sapling, and that you should cut it with three strokes, looking to the east, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Others think the best time for cutting the rod is at the new moon on a Tuesday morning before sunrise. Once you have got this valuable instrument, you have only to spread a garment on a molehill or on the threshold, and to lay on with hearty goodwill, mentioning the name of the person whom you desire to injure. Though he may be miles off, he will feel every whack as if it descended on his body.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-756" id="noteref-1-1-756" epub:type="noteref">756</a></p>
					<p>Again, magic may be wrought on a man sympathetically, not only through his clothes and severed parts of himself, but also through the impressions left by his body in sand or earth. In particular, it is a worldwide superstition that by injuring footprints you injure the feet that made them. Thus the natives of southeastern Australia think that they can lame a man by placing sharp pieces of quartz, glass, bone, or charcoal in his footprints. Rheumatic pains are often attributed by them to this cause. Seeing a Tatungolung man very lame, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howitt asked him what was the matter. He said, “Some fellow has put <i>bottle</i> in my foot.” He was suffering from rheumatism, but believed that an enemy had found his foot-track and had buried in it a piece of broken bottle, the magical influence of which had entered his foot. On another occasion <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howitt’s party was followed by a number of strange natives who looked with great interest at the footprints of the horses and camels. A black fellow with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howitt was much alarmed, and declared that the strangers were putting poison in his footsteps.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-757" id="noteref-1-1-757" epub:type="noteref">757</a> The Wyingurri, a tribe on the border of western Australia, have a magical instrument made of resin and rats’ teeth which they call a sun, because it is supposed to contain the solar heat. By placing it on a man’s tracks they think they can throw him into a violent fever, which will soon burn him up.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-758" id="noteref-1-1-758" epub:type="noteref">758</a> In the Unmatjera tribe of Central Australia, when a boy has been circumcised he must hide in the bush, and if he should see a woman’s tracks he must be very careful to jump over them. For if his foot were to touch them, the spirit of the louse which lives in the woman’s hair would go to him, and his head would be full of lice.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-759" id="noteref-1-1-759" epub:type="noteref">759</a> In New Britain it is thought that you can cause the sickness or death of a man by pricking his footprints with the sting of a stingray.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-760" id="noteref-1-1-760" epub:type="noteref">760</a> The Maoris imagine that they can work grievous harm to an enemy by taking up earth from his footprints, depositing it in a sacred place, and performing a ceremony over it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-761" id="noteref-1-1-761" epub:type="noteref">761</a> In Savage Island a common form of witchcraft was to take up the soil on which an enemy had set his foot, and to carry it to a sacred place, where it was solemnly cursed, in order that the man might be afflicted with lameness.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-762" id="noteref-1-1-762" epub:type="noteref">762</a> The Galelareese think that if anybody sticks something sharp into your footprints while you are walking, you will be wounded in your feet.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-763" id="noteref-1-1-763" epub:type="noteref">763</a> In Japan, if a house has been robbed by night and the burglar’s footprints are visible in the morning, the householder will burn mugwort on them, hoping thereby to hurt the robber’s feet so that he cannot run far, and the police may easily overtake him.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-764" id="noteref-1-1-764" epub:type="noteref">764</a> Among the Karens of Burma some people are said to keep poison fangs for the purpose of killing their enemies. These they thrust into the footprints of the person whom they wish to destroy, and soon he finds himself with a sore foot, as if a dog had bitten it. The sore rapidly grows worse till death follows.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-765" id="noteref-1-1-765" epub:type="noteref">765</a> Peasants of northern India commonly attribute all sorts of pains and sores to the machinations of a witch or sorcerer who has meddled with their footprints.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-766" id="noteref-1-1-766" epub:type="noteref">766</a> For example, with the Chero, a Dravidian race of labourers in the hill country of Mirzapur, a favourite mode of harming an enemy is to measure his footprints in the dust with a straw and then mutter a spell over them; that brings on wounds and sores in his feet.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-767" id="noteref-1-1-767" epub:type="noteref">767</a> Such magical operations have been familiar to the Hindus from of old. In the <i>Kausika Sutra</i>, a book of sorcery, it is directed that, while your foe is walking southward, you should make cuts in his footprint with the leaf of a certain tree or with the blade of an axe (it is not quite clear which is to be used); then you must tie dust from the footprint in the leaf of a certain tree (<i>Butea frondosa</i>) and throw it into a frying-pan; if it crackles in the pan, your enemy is undone.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-768" id="noteref-1-1-768" epub:type="noteref">768</a> Another old Hindu charm was to obtain earth from the footprint of a beleaguered king and scatter it in the wind.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-769" id="noteref-1-1-769" epub:type="noteref">769</a> The Herero of South Africa take earth from the footprints of a lion and throw it on the track of an enemy, with the wish, “May the lion kill you.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-770" id="noteref-1-1-770" epub:type="noteref">770</a> The Ovambo of the same region believe that they can be bewitched by an enemy through the dust or sand of their footprints. Hence a man who has special reason to dread the spite of a foe will carefully efface his footprints with a branch as fast as he makes them.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-771" id="noteref-1-1-771" epub:type="noteref">771</a> The Ewe-speaking people of West Africa fancy they can drive an enemy mad by throwing a magic powder on his footprints.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-772" id="noteref-1-1-772" epub:type="noteref">772</a> Among the Shuswap and Carrier Indians of Northwest America shamans used to bewitch a man by taking earth from the spot on which he had stood and placing it in their medicine-bags; then their victim fell sick or died.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-773" id="noteref-1-1-773" epub:type="noteref">773</a> In North Africa the magic of the footprints is sometimes used for more amiable purposes. A woman who wishes to attach her husband or lover to herself will take earth from the print of his right foot, tie it up with some of his hairs in a packet, and wear the packet next her skin.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-774" id="noteref-1-1-774" epub:type="noteref">774</a></p>
					<p>Similar practices prevail in various parts of Europe. Thus in Mecklenburg it is thought that if you drive a nail into a man’s footprint he will fall lame; sometimes it is required that the nail should be taken from a coffin.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-775" id="noteref-1-1-775" epub:type="noteref">775</a> A like mode of injuring an enemy is resorted to in some parts of France.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-776" id="noteref-1-1-776" epub:type="noteref">776</a> It is said that there was an old woman who used to frequent Stow in Suffolk, and she was a witch. If, while she walked, anyone went after her and stuck a nail or a knife into her footprint in the dust, the dame could not stir a step till it was withdrawn.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-777" id="noteref-1-1-777" epub:type="noteref">777</a> More commonly, it would seem, in Germany earth from the footprint is tied up in a cloth and hung in the chimney smoke; as it dries up, so the man withers away or his foot shrivels up.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-778" id="noteref-1-1-778" epub:type="noteref">778</a> The same practice and the same belief are said to be common in Matogrosso, a province of Brazil.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-779" id="noteref-1-1-779" epub:type="noteref">779</a> A Bohemian variation of the charm is to put the earth from the footprint in a pot with nails, needles, broken glass, and so forth, then set the pot on the fire and let it boil till it bursts. After that the man whose footprint has been boiled will have a lame leg for the rest of his life.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-780" id="noteref-1-1-780" epub:type="noteref">780</a> Among the Lithuanians the proceeding is somewhat different. They dig up the earth from the person’s footprint and bury it, with various incantations, in a graveyard. That causes the person to sicken and die.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-781" id="noteref-1-1-781" epub:type="noteref">781</a> A similar practice is reported from Mecklenburg.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-782" id="noteref-1-1-782" epub:type="noteref">782</a> The Estonians of the island of Oesel measure the footprint with a stick and bury the stick, thereby undermining the health of the man or woman whose foot made the mark.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-783" id="noteref-1-1-783" epub:type="noteref">783</a> Among the South Slavs a girl will dig up the earth from the footprints of the man she loves and put it in a flowerpot. Then she plants in the pot a marigold, a flower that is thought to be fadeless. And as its golden blossom grows and blooms and never fades, so shall her sweetheart’s love grow and bloom, and never, never fade.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-784" id="noteref-1-1-784" epub:type="noteref">784</a> Thus the love-spell acts on the man through the earth he trod on. An old Danish mode of concluding a treaty was based on the same idea of the sympathetic connection between a man and his footprints: the covenanting parties sprinkled each other’s footprints with their own blood, thus giving a pledge of fidelity.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-785" id="noteref-1-1-785" epub:type="noteref">785</a> In ancient Greece superstitions of the same sort seem to have been current, for it was thought that if a horse stepped on the track of a wolf he was seized with numbness;​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-786" id="noteref-1-1-786" epub:type="noteref">786</a> and a maxim ascribed to Pythagoras forbade people to pierce a man’s footprints with a nail or a knife.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-787" id="noteref-1-1-787" epub:type="noteref">787</a></p>
					<p>The same superstition is turned to account by hunters in many parts of the world for the purpose of running down the game. Thus a German huntsman will stick a nail taken from a coffin into the fresh spoor of the quarry, believing that this will hinder the animal from escaping.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-788" id="noteref-1-1-788" epub:type="noteref">788</a> The aborigines of Victoria put hot embers in the tracks of the animals they were pursuing.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-789" id="noteref-1-1-789" epub:type="noteref">789</a> Hottentot hunters throw into the air a handful of sand taken from the footprints of the game, believing that this will bring the animal down.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-790" id="noteref-1-1-790" epub:type="noteref">790</a> Thompson Indians used to lay charms on the tracks of wounded deer; after that they deemed it superfluous to pursue the animal any further that day, for being thus charmed it could not travel far and would soon die.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-791" id="noteref-1-1-791" epub:type="noteref">791</a> Similarly, Ojebway Indians placed “medicine” on the track of the first deer or bear they met with, supposing that this would soon bring the animal into sight, even if it were two or three days’ journey off; for this charm had power to compress a journey of several days into a few hours.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-792" id="noteref-1-1-792" epub:type="noteref">792</a> Ewe hunters of West Africa stab the footprints of game with a sharp-pointed stick in order to maim the quarry and allow them to come up with it.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-793" id="noteref-1-1-793" epub:type="noteref">793</a> If Estonian peasants find a wolf’s dung on a beast’s tracks, they burn it and scatter the ashes to the wind. This gives the wolf a pain in his stomach and makes him lose his way.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-794" id="noteref-1-1-794" epub:type="noteref">794</a> The Aino think that hares bewitch people. Hence if one of them sees the track of a hare in the snow near his hut, he should carefully scoop it up with a water-ladle and then turn it upside down, saying as he does so that he buries the soul of the hare under the snow, and expressing a wish that the animal may sicken and die.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-795" id="noteref-1-1-795" epub:type="noteref">795</a> In order to recover strayed cattle, the Zulus take the animals’ dung and earth from their footprints and place both in the chief’s vessel, round which a magic circle is drawn. Then the chief says: “I have now conquered them. Those cattle are now here; I am now sitting upon them. I do not know in what way they will escape.”​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-796" id="noteref-1-1-796" epub:type="noteref">796</a></p>
					<p>But though the footprint is the most obvious it is not the only impression made by the body through which magic may be wrought on a man. The aborigines of southeastern Australia believe that a man may be injured by burying sharp fragments of quartz, glass, and so forth in the mark made by his reclining body; the magical virtue of these sharp things enters his body and causes those acute pains which the ignorant European puts down to rheumatism.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-797" id="noteref-1-1-797" epub:type="noteref">797</a> Sometimes they beat the place where the man sat with a pointed stick of the he-oak (<i>Casuarina leptoclada</i>), chanting an appropriate song at the same time; the stick will enter his person and kill him, provided the place operated on is still warm with the heat of his body.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-798" id="noteref-1-1-798" epub:type="noteref">798</a> At Delena, in British New Guinea, a man will sometimes revenge himself on a girl who has rejected his love by thrusting the spine of a stingray into the spot where she has been sitting; afterwards he puts it in the sun for a day or two and finally heats it over a fire. In a couple of days the girl dies.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-799" id="noteref-1-1-799" epub:type="noteref">799</a> The natives of Tumleo, an island off German New Guinea, efface the marks they have left on the ground where they sat, lest magic should be wrought on them thereby.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-800" id="noteref-1-1-800" epub:type="noteref">800</a> Before they leave a camping-place some of the natives of German New Guinea are careful to stab the ground thoroughly with spears, in order to prevent a sorcerer from making any use of a drop of sweat or any other personal remains which they may chance to leave behind.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-801" id="noteref-1-1-801" epub:type="noteref">801</a> We can now understand why it was a maxim with the Pythagoreans that in rising from bed you should smooth away the impression left by your body on the bedclothes.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-802" id="noteref-1-1-802" epub:type="noteref">802</a> The rule was simply an old precaution against magic, forming part of a whole code of superstitious maxims which antiquity fathered on Pythagoras, though doubtless they were familiar to the barbarous forefathers of the Greeks long before the time of that philosopher.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-803" id="noteref-1-1-803" epub:type="noteref">803</a> To ensure the good behaviour of an ally with whom they have just had a conference, the Basutos will cut and preserve the grass on which the ally sat during the interview.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-804" id="noteref-1-1-804" epub:type="noteref">804</a> Probably they regard the grass as a hostage for the observance of the treaty, since through it they could punish the man who sat on the grass if he should break faith. Moors who write on the sand are superstitiously careful to obliterate all the marks they made, never leaving a stroke or a dot in the sand when they have done writing.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-805" id="noteref-1-1-805" epub:type="noteref">805</a> Another of the so-called maxims of Pythagoras bade people in lifting a pot always to smooth away the imprint it left on the ashes.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-806" id="noteref-1-1-806" epub:type="noteref">806</a> So in Cambodia they say that when you lift a pot from the fire you should not set it down on the ashes; but that, if you must do so, you should be careful, in lifting the pot from the ashes, to efface the impression it has made. Otherwise they think that want will knock at your door.​<a href="endnotes-1-1.xhtml#note-1-1-807" id="noteref-1-1-807" epub:type="noteref">807</a> But this seems to be an afterthought, devised to explain a rule of which the original meaning was forgotten. The old notion probably was that a magician could sympathetically injure any person who ate out of a pot by means of the impression which the pot had left on the ashes; or, to be more explicit, contagious magic was supposed to work through the impression of the pot to the pot itself, through the pot to the meat contained in it, and finally through the meat to the eater.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-1-3-4">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">The Magician’s Progress</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>We have now concluded our examination of the general principles of sympathetic magic. The examples by which I have illustrated them have been drawn for the most part from what may be called private magic, that is from magical rites and incantations practised for the benefit or the injury of individuals. But in savage society there is commonly to be found in addition what we may call public magic, that is, sorcery practised for the benefit of the whole community. Wherever ceremonies of this sort are observed for the common good, it is obvious that the magician ceases to be merely a private practitioner and becomes to some extent a public functionary. The development of such a class of functionaries is of great importance for the political as well as the religious evolution of society. For when the welfare of the tribe is supposed to depend on the performance of these magical rites, the magician rises into a position of much influence and repute, and may readily acquire the rank and authority of a chief or king. The profession accordingly draws into its ranks some of the ablest and most ambitious men of the tribe, because it holds out to them a prospect of honour, wealth, and power such as hardly any other career could offer. The acuter minds perceive how easy it is to dupe their weaker brother and to play on his superstition for their own advantage. Not that the sorcerer is always a knave and impostor; he is often sincerely convinced that he really possesses those wonderful powers which the credulity of his fellows ascribes to him. But the more sagacious he is, the more likely he is to see through the fallacies which impose on duller wits. Thus the ablest members of the profession must tend to be more or less conscious deceivers; and it is just these men who in virtue of their superior ability will generally come to the top and win for themselves positions of the highest dignity and the most commanding authority. The pitfalls which beset the path of the professional sorcerer are many, and as a rule only the man of coolest head and sharpest wit will be able to steer his way through them safely. For it must always be remembered that every single profession and claim put forward by the magician as such is false; not one of them can be maintained without deception, conscious or unconscious. Accordingly the sorcerer who sincerely believes in his own extravagant pretensions is in far greater peril and is much more likely to be cut short in his career than the deliberate impostor. The honest wizard always expects that his charms and incantations will produce their supposed effect; and when they fail, not only really, as they always do, but conspicuously and disastrously, as they often do, he is taken aback: he is not, like his knavish colleague, ready with a plausible excuse to account for the failure, and before he can find one he may be knocked on the head by his disappointed and angry employers.</p>
					<p>The general result is that at this stage of social evolution the supreme power tends to fall into the hands of men of the keenest intelligence and the most unscrupulous character. If we could balance the harm they do by their knavery against the benefits they confer by their superior sagacity, it might well be found that the good greatly outweighed the evil. For more mischief has probably been wrought in the world by honest fools in high places than by intelligent rascals. Once your shrewd rogue has attained the height of his ambition, and has no longer any selfish end to further, he may, and often does, turn his talents, his experience, his resources, to the service of the public. Many men who have been least scrupulous in the acquisition of power have been most beneficent in the use of it, whether the power they aimed at and won was that of wealth, political authority, or whatnot. In the field of politics the wily intriguer, the ruthless victor, may end by being a wise and magnanimous ruler, blessed in his lifetime, lamented at his death, admired and applauded by posterity. Such men, to take two of the most conspicuous instances, were Julius Caesar and Augustus. But once a fool always a fool, and the greater the power in his hands the more disastrous is likely to be the use he makes of it. The heaviest calamity in English history, the breach with America, might never have occurred if George the Third had not been an honest dullard.</p>
					<p>Thus, so far as the public profession of magic affected the constitution of savage society, it tended to place the control of affairs in the hands of the ablest man: it shifted the balance of power from the many to the one: it substituted a monarchy for a democracy, or rather for an oligarchy of old men; for in general the savage community is ruled, not by the whole body of adult males, but by a council of elders. The change, by whatever causes produced, and whatever the character of the early rulers, was on the whole very beneficial. For the rise of monarchy appears to be an essential condition of the emergence of mankind from savagery. No human being is so hidebound by custom and tradition as your democratic savage; in no state of society consequently is progress so slow and difficult. The old notion that the savage is the freest of mankind is the reverse of the truth. He is a slave, not indeed to a visible master, but to the past, to the spirits of his dead forefathers, who haunt his steps from birth to death, and rule him with a rod of iron. What they did is the pattern of right, the unwritten law to which he yields a blind unquestioning obedience. The least possible scope is thus afforded to superior talent to change old customs for the better. The ablest man is dragged down by the weakest and dullest, who necessarily sets the standard, since he cannot rise, while the other can fall. The surface of such a society presents a uniform dead level, so far as it is humanly possible to reduce the natural inequalities, the immeasurable real differences of inborn capacity and temper, to a false superficial appearance of equality. From this low and stagnant condition of affairs, which demagogues and dreamers in later times have lauded as the ideal state, the Golden Age, of humanity, everything that helps to raise society by opening a career to talent and proportioning the degrees of authority to men’s natural abilities, deserves to be welcomed by all who have the real good of their fellows at heart. Once these elevating influences have begun to operate⁠—and they cannot be forever suppressed⁠—the progress of civilisation becomes comparatively rapid. The rise of one man to supreme power enables him to carry through changes in a single lifetime which previously many generations might not have sufficed to effect; and if, as will often happen, he is a man of intellect and energy above the common, he will readily avail himself of the opportunity. Even the whims and caprices of a tyrant may be of service in breaking the chain of custom which lies so heavy on the savage. And as soon as the tribe ceases to be swayed by the timid and divided counsels of the elders, and yields to the direction of a single strong and resolute mind, it becomes formidable to its neighbours and enters on a career of aggrandisement, which at an early stage of history is often highly favourable to social, industrial, and intellectual progress. For extending its sway, partly by force of arms, partly by the voluntary submission of weaker tribes, the community soon acquires wealth and slaves, both of which, by relieving some classes from the perpetual struggle for a bare subsistence, afford them an opportunity of devoting themselves to that disinterested pursuit of knowledge which is the noblest and most powerful instrument to ameliorate the lot of man.</p>
					<p>Intellectual progress, which reveals itself in the growth of art and science and the spread of more liberal views, cannot be dissociated from industrial or economic progress, and that in its turn receives an immense impulse from conquest and empire. It is no mere accident that the most vehement outbursts of activity of the human mind have followed close on the heels of victory, and that the great conquering races of the world have commonly done most to advance and spread civilisation, thus healing in peace the wounds they inflicted in war. The Babylonians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs are our witnesses in the past: we may yet live to see a similar outburst in Japan. Nor, to remount the stream of history to its sources, is it an accident that all the first great strides towards civilisation have been made under despotic and theocratic governments, like those of Egypt, Babylon, and Peru, where the supreme ruler claimed and received the servile allegiance of his subjects in the double character of a king and a god. It is hardly too much to say that at this early epoch despotism is the best friend of humanity and, paradoxical as it may sound, of liberty. For after all there is more liberty in the best sense⁠—liberty to think our own thoughts and to fashion our own destinies⁠—under the most absolute despotism, the most grinding tyranny, than under the apparent freedom of savage life, where the individual’s lot is cast from the cradle to the grave in the iron mould of hereditary custom.</p>
					<p>So far, therefore, as the public profession of magic has been one of the roads by which the ablest men have passed to supreme power, it has contributed to emancipate mankind from the thraldom of tradition and to elevate them into a larger, freer life, with a broader outlook on the world. This is no small service rendered to humanity. And when we remember further that in another direction magic has paved the way for science, we are forced to admit that if the black art has done much evil, it has also been the source of much good; that if it is the child of error, it has yet been the mother of freedom and truth.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
