<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="division">
			<section id="chapter-5-11" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">The Sacrifice of First-Fruits</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>In the preceding chapter we saw that primitive peoples often partake of the new corn and the new fruits sacramentally, because they suppose them to be instinct with a divine spirit or life. At a later age, when the fruits of the earth are conceived as created rather than as animated by a divinity, the new fruits are no longer partaken of sacramentally as the body and blood of a god; but a portion of them is offered to the divine beings who are believed to have produced them. Originally, perhaps, offerings of first-fruits were supposed to be necessary for the subsistence of the divinities, who without them must have died of hunger;<a href="#note_302" id="noteref_302" name="noteref_302"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">302</span></span></a> but in after times they seem to be looked on rather in the light of a tribute or mark of homage rendered by man to the gods for the good gifts they have bestowed on him. Sometimes the first-fruits are presented to the king, perhaps in his character of a god; very often they are made over to the spirits of the human dead, who are sometimes thought to have it in their power to give or withhold the crops. Till the first-fruits have been offered to the deity, the dead, or the king, people are not at liberty to eat of the new crops. But, as it is not always possible to draw a sharp line between the sacrament and the sacrifice of first-fruits, it may be well to round off this part of the subject by giving some examples of the latter.</p>
				<p>The Ovambo or Ovakuanjama of South-West Africa stand in great fear of the spirits of the dead, who are believed to exercise a powerful influence over the living; in particular the spirits of dead chiefs can give or withhold rain, a matter of vital importance in the parched region of Ovamboland. Accordingly the people pay great respect to the spirits of the departed, and they hold a thanksgiving festival in their honour at the close of the harvest. When the new corn has been reaped and ground, a portion of it is made into porridge and carried to the quarters of the principal wife. Here all the inhabitants of the kraal assemble; the head of the family takes some of the porridge, dips it in melted fat, and throws it to the east, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Take it, ye spirits of the East!”</span> Then he does the same towards the west, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Take it, ye spirits of the West!”</span> This is regarded as a thank-offering presented to the spirits of the dead for not visiting the people with sickness while they were cultivating the fields, and especially for sending the rain.<a href="#note_303" id="noteref_303" name="noteref_303"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">303</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the Basutos, when the corn has been threshed and winnowed, it is left in a heap on the threshing-floor. Before it can be touched a religious ceremony must be performed. The persons to whom the corn belongs bring a new vessel to the spot, in which they boil some of the grain. When it is boiled they throw a few handfuls of it on the heap of corn, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thank you, gods; give us bread to-morrow also!”</span> When this is done the rest is eaten, and the provision for the year is considered pure and fit to eat.<a href="#note_304" id="noteref_304" name="noteref_304"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">304</span></span></a> Here the sacrifice of the first-fruits to the gods is the prominent idea, which comes out again in the custom of leaving in the threshing-floor a little hollow filled with grain, as a thank-offering to these powerful beings.<a href="#note_305" id="noteref_305" name="noteref_305"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">305</span></span></a> Still the Basutos retain a lively sense of the sanctity of the corn in itself; for, so long as it is exposed to view, all defiled persons are carefully kept from it. If it is necessary to employ a defiled person in carrying home the harvest, he remains at some distance while the sacks are being filled, and only approaches to place them upon the draught oxen. As soon as the load is deposited at the dwelling he retires, and under no pretext may he help to pour the corn into the baskets in which it is kept.<a href="#note_306" id="noteref_306" name="noteref_306"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">306</span></span></a> The Makalaka worship a god called Shumpaoli, whose image is to be found in the enclosure outside of their huts. The image consists of the head of an axe, a stone from the river, and a twig or long stalk of grass planted between them in the ground. About this god they scatter the first-fruits of their harvest, and when they brew beer they pour some of it on him.<a href="#note_307" id="noteref_307" name="noteref_307"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">307</span></span></a> Of the Bantu tribes of South Africa in general we are told that they might not eat of the new crops till the chief gave them leave to do so. When the millet was ripe he appointed a general assembly of the people at his residence, which was known as the Great Place; he then performed certain rites, and in particular he offered a small quantity of the fresh grain to the spirits of his ancestors, either by laying it on their graves or by casting it into a stream. After that he granted the people permission to gather and eat the new corn.<a href="#note_308" id="noteref_308" name="noteref_308"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">308</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the Maraves or Zimbas, a tribe of the Upper Zambesi, bordering on the Portuguese territory, it is the custom that first-fruits of all produce must be offered to the spirits of the dead (<i>muzimos</i>), to whom they attribute all the good and ill that befall them. Every year at harvest-time the offerings are brought to these mighty beings. Small portions of all kinds of fruits, together with cooked fowls and <i>pombe</i> (the native intoxicant), are carried in procession, with songs, dances, and the beating of drums, to the burial-ground, which is always situated in a grove or a wilderness and is esteemed a sacred place; no tree may be felled and no animal killed on the holy ground, for the natives believe that a spirit of the dead is present in everything within the precincts.<a href="#note_309" id="noteref_309" name="noteref_309"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">309</span></span></a> Among the Yaos of British Central Africa <span class="tei tei-q">“offerings are made to the spirit world or to <i>mulungu</i> as the great agency in the affairs of human life. Outside the village, or beside the head-man's hut, may often be seen a rough shed. In this are placed the first-fruits of the new crop, green maize, beans, pumpkins, peas, etc., as a thank offering from the villagers for their harvest. This is described as <i>kulomba mulungu</i>, to worship <i>mulungu</i>.”</span><a href="#note_310" id="noteref_310" name="noteref_310"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">310</span></span></a> By <i>mulungu</i> the Yaos mean primarily and strictly the soul of a dead person, which is believed to influence the lives and fortunes of the survivors, and therefore needs to be honoured and propitiated; but they employ the word in an extended sense to signify the aggregate of the spirits of all the dead, and missionaries have adopted it as the nearest equivalent for the word God.<a href="#note_311" id="noteref_311" name="noteref_311"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">311</span></span></a> Among the Winamwanga, a tribe of north-eastern Rhodesia, between Lake Nyassa and Lake Tanganyika, it is customary to offer the first beer and the first flour made from the new harvest of millet to the spirits of the dead. The head of the family pours out some beer and a small quantity of the new flour in a heap on the floor of his own house, after which he prays to the spirits of his forefathers, thanks them for the harvest, and invites them to come and partake of it with the family. The priest performs the same ceremony at the shrine for the whole village. The householder or the priest speaks to the spirits as if they were sitting around him. Thus he may say, <span class="tei tei-q">“O ye great spirits, fathers in the spirit world, mothers in the spirit world, and all ye others, bless us now. Here is the food, and here is the offering, call ye all of you each other.”</span> Then after summoning the dead by their names he may go on: <span class="tei tei-q">“Come all of you and partake of this offering. Ye great spirits, all things of this earth were known to you while yet ye were here. Take care of this your family, and of all these your children. May we ever go in our ways in prosperity. Oh! ye great spirits, give to us food and all the produce of the land. Drive ye away all illnesses from your family, ye great spirits; every evil spirit put far away from us, and whatever might seek to hurt us may it fly away on the wind. Cause ye us to abide in peace.”</span><a href="#note_312" id="noteref_312" name="noteref_312"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">312</span></span></a> Among the Yombe of Northern Rhodesia, to the west of Lake Tanganyika, no one is allowed to partake of the new fruits until certain ceremonies have been performed. Escorted by a band of drummers, his medicine-men, and the village elders, the chief ascends the Kalanga Mountain until he reaches the hollow fastness which in former days his forefathers held against the marauding Angoni. Here the grandfather of the present chief lies buried. Before his tomb a bull is slain, and pots of freshly-brewed beer and porridge made from the first-fruits are deposited before the shrine. The ground is then carefully cleaned of weeds, and the blood of the bull is sprinkled on the freshly-turned-up soil and on the rafters of the little hut. After offering the customary prayers in thanksgiving for the harvest, and beseeching the spirits to partake with them of the first-fruits, the procession retires. On their return to the village, the carcase of the bull is divided, all partake of the fresh porridge and beer awaiting them, and the day closes with beer-drinking and dancing.<a href="#note_313" id="noteref_313" name="noteref_313"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">313</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The A-Kamba of British East Africa offer first-fruits to the spirits of their dead before anybody may eat of the new crop. Sometimes these offerings are piled on the graves of chiefs and left there along with the meat of a goat which has been sacrificed. Sometimes the offerings are made in a cleared place under the sacred wild fig tree (<i>mumbo</i>) of the village; for the A-Kamba think that the spirits of the dead (<i>aiimu</i>) dwell in wild fig trees, and they build miniature huts at the foot of the trees for the accommodation of the ghosts. The clearing under the wild fig tree of the village is called the Place of Prayer (<i>ithembo</i>). When any crop is ripe, all the inhabitants of the district assemble, and a very old man and woman, chosen for the purpose, leave the crowd and go to the Place of Prayer, where they call aloud to the spirits of the dead and ask leave to eat the crop. The people then dance, and during the dance one of the women is sure to be seized with a fit of shaking and to cry aloud, which is deemed the answer of the spirits to the people's prayer.<a href="#note_314" id="noteref_314" name="noteref_314"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">314</span></span></a> Amongst the Baganda a man used to offer the first-fruits of a new garden to his god, imploring the blessing of the deity on the future crops.<a href="#note_315" id="noteref_315" name="noteref_315"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">315</span></span></a> Among the Dinka of the White Nile no member of a family may eat the new fruits until the father or mother has scattered some of them over the courtyard of the house in order to ensure the blessing of God.<a href="#note_316" id="noteref_316" name="noteref_316"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">316</span></span></a> When the millet is ripe, the Nubas of Jebel-Nuba, a range of mountains in the eastern Sudan, observe the following ceremony. Every group of villages is presided over by a sacred pontiff called a <i>cogiour</i> or <i>codjour</i>, who is believed to act under the inspiration of a spirit named Laro. So when it is known that the grain is ready to be cut, a drum is beaten, the pontiff mounts his horse and, attended by all the elderly men and women, repairs to his fields, while the rest of the people betake themselves to their own farms. There the people whose eldest child is a boy break five ears of corn, and those whose eldest child is a girl break four. But young unmarried people break five or four ears according as they desire to have a boy or a girl for their first-born. All then return to the village and place the ears they have gathered on the hedge which serves as an enclosure. When the beat of the drum and multitudinous cries of joy announce the return of the pontiff, the people take the gathered ears and advance to meet him. He rides at the head of a cavalcade composed of all the men who have horses. After that, attended by the elders, he retires to his house, while the rest of the people deposit the ears of corn in the cave of Laro, the being who inspires the holy pontiff. Feasting, drinking, and horse-races conclude the ceremony. At the races the young folk amuse themselves by flinging stalks of millet before the horses to make them shy and throw their riders.<a href="#note_317" id="noteref_317" name="noteref_317"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">317</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The Igbiras, a pagan tribe at the confluence of the Niger and the Benue, bury their dead in their houses and have great faith in the power of the ghosts, whose guidance and protection they seek to ensure by periodical offerings of goats and cocks. Also they offer the first-fruits of their crops to the dead, hanging bunches of the new grain over the burial-places in their huts. The Igbiras also celebrate the festival of the new yams with great pomp. It is their New Year's Day. Sacrifices of fowls and goats are offered, and wine and oil are freely poured out. The king takes a prominent part in the feast.<a href="#note_318" id="noteref_318" name="noteref_318"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">318</span></span></a> Among the Cross River natives, in the lower valley of the Niger, the eating of the new yams is an occasion of great rejoicing, but no one may partake of them until a portion has been ceremonially offered to the deities. The festival is not held simultaneously but separately for each village according to the state of the crops. High and low, old and young, men, women, and children dance to music on these joyful occasions.<a href="#note_319" id="noteref_319" name="noteref_319"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">319</span></span></a> The Matse tribe of Ewe negroes in Togoland worship the Earth at the times when they dig the ripe yams in September, when they reap the ripe maize in November, and when they burn the grass in February. The place where they offer sacrifices to the Earth goddess is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wood of our Mother.”</span> In the month of November the hunters, led by the Chief Huntsman and the High Priest, repair to the maize-fields, where they gather cobs of the ripe grain. Some of these they deposit, with prayers, in the sacrificial place in the wood, but they keep the finest cobs for themselves. After this sacrifice of the new corn to the Earth goddess everybody is free to get in his maize.<a href="#note_320" id="noteref_320" name="noteref_320"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">320</span></span></a> Amongst the Hos, another Ewe tribe of Togoland, when a man is about to dig up his yam crop, he first of all digs up two yams which he had planted for the goddess Mawu Sodza. These he holds up to her and prays, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“O Mawu Sodza, thou ship full of yams, give to me, and I will give to you; pass me over, and I will pass you over. Here are thy yams, which I have dug for thee. When I dig mine, grant that I may have plenty.”</span> Thereupon he begins to dig the crop.<a href="#note_321" id="noteref_321" name="noteref_321"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">321</span></span></a> Among the Bassari, another tribe of Togoland, no man may eat of the new yams until the people have paid a tribute of the first-fruits to the king. At such times long files of men, women, and children may be seen wending their way to the capital to render to the king his dues. But the king himself may not partake of the new yams until he has offered a portion of them, along with ten white fowls, to the fetish.<a href="#note_322" id="noteref_322" name="noteref_322"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">322</span></span></a> Before the Adeli of the Slave Coast may eat of the new yams, the owner of each farm must bring the first yams of his field to the fetish priest, who offers them to the fetish, after which he declares that the harvest may take place. The festival, accompanied by shooting and dancing, lasts several days; it generally falls in August.<a href="#note_323" id="noteref_323" name="noteref_323"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">323</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the Betsileo of Madagascar the king used to receive first-fruits of all the crops, such as rice, maize, manioc, beans, and sweet potatoes: indeed this tribute of first-fruits formed a large part of his revenue.<a href="#note_324" id="noteref_324" name="noteref_324"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">324</span></span></a> The Hovas of Madagascar present the first sheaves of the new grain to the sovereign. The sheaves are carried in procession to the palace from time to time as the grain ripens.<a href="#note_325" id="noteref_325" name="noteref_325"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">325</span></span></a> So in Burma, when the <i>pangati</i> fruits ripen, some of them used to be taken to the king's palace that he might eat of them; no one might partake of them before the king.<a href="#note_326" id="noteref_326" name="noteref_326"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">326</span></span></a> It has been suggested that the modern system of taxation may be directly derived from the ancient obligation of paying first-fruits to a sacred pontiff or king.<a href="#note_327" id="noteref_327" name="noteref_327"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">327</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Every year, when they gather their first crops, the Kochs of Assam offer some of the first-fruits to their ancestors, calling to them by name and clapping their hands.<a href="#note_328" id="noteref_328" name="noteref_328"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">328</span></span></a> Before they harvest any of their crops, the Garos, another people of Assam, deem it necessary to sacrifice the first-fruits of the crops to the gods. Thus, for example, they gather some ears of rice or millet, pound them between two stones, and offer them up on a piece of plantain stem.<a href="#note_329" id="noteref_329" name="noteref_329"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">329</span></span></a> In August, when the rice ripens, the Hos of Bengal offer the first-fruits of the harvest to Sing Bonga, who dwells in the sun. Along with the new rice a white cock is sacrificed; and till the sacrifice has been offered no one may eat the new rice.<a href="#note_330" id="noteref_330" name="noteref_330"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">330</span></span></a> Among the Oraons of Bengal no one will partake of the new rice until some of it has been offered to the ancestors. A handful of it is cooked and spread on the ground, and a pot of rice-beer is brewed and some of the beer also spilt on the ground. Before drinking every one dips his finger in his cup and lets fall some drops in honour of the ancestors. Further, a whity grey fowl is killed, and the eldest of the family, addressing the ancestral spirits, says, <span class="tei tei-q">“O old mothers and fathers, you have always been so good to us on these days. Here we are rejoicing: we cannot forget you: come and rejoice with us.”</span><a href="#note_331" id="noteref_331" name="noteref_331"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">331</span></span></a> In Ladakh the peasants offer the first two or three handfuls of the wheat-crop to the spirit who presides over agriculture. These offerings they attach to the tops of the pillars which support the roofs of their houses; and thus the bands of straw and ears of wheat form a primitive sort of capital. Rams' horns are sometimes added to this decoration.<a href="#note_332" id="noteref_332" name="noteref_332"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">332</span></span></a> In the Himalayan districts of the North-Western provinces of India the fields and boundaries are under the protection of a beneficent local deity named Kshetrpal or Bhumiya. Every village possesses a small temple sacred to him. When a crop is sown, a handful of grain is sprinkled over a stone in the corner of the field nearest to the temple, in order that the god may protect the growing crop from hail, blight, and the ravages of wild beasts; and at harvest he receives the first-fruits in order that he may save the garnered grain from the inroads of rats and insects.<a href="#note_333" id="noteref_333" name="noteref_333"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">333</span></span></a> Among the hill tribes near Rajamahall, in India, when the <i>kosarane</i> grain is being reaped in November or early in December, a festival is held as a thanksgiving before the new grain is eaten. On a day appointed by the chief a goat is sacrificed by two men to a god called Chitariah Gossaih, after which the chief himself sacrifices a fowl. Then the vassals repair to their fields, offer thanksgiving, make an oblation to Kull Gossaih (who is described as the Ceres of these mountaineers), and then return to their houses to eat of the new <i>kosarane</i>. As soon as the inhabitants have assembled at the chief's house—the men sitting on one side and the women on the other—a hog, a measure of <i>kosarane</i>, and a pot of spirits are presented to the chief, who in return blesses his vassals, and exhorts them to industry and good behaviour; <span class="tei tei-q">“after which, making a libation in the names of all their gods, and of their dead, he drinks, and also throws a little of the <i>kosarane</i> away, repeating the same pious exclamations.”</span> Drinking and festivity then begin, and are kept up for several days. The same tribes have another festival at reaping the Indian corn in August or September. Every man repairs to his fields with a hog, a goat, or a fowl, which he sacrifices to Kull Gossaih. Then, having feasted, he returns home, where another repast is prepared. On this day it is customary for every family in the village to distribute to every house a little of what they have prepared for their feast. Should any person eat of the new <i>kosarane</i> or the new Indian corn before the festival and public thanksgiving at the reaping of these crops, the chief fines him a white cock, which is sacrificed to Chitariah.<a href="#note_334" id="noteref_334" name="noteref_334"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">334</span></span></a> In the Central Provinces of India the first grain of the season is commonly offered to the god Bhímsen or Bhím Deo.<a href="#note_335" id="noteref_335" name="noteref_335"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">335</span></span></a> When the new rice crop is ripe, the Gadbas, a primitive tribe of the Central Provinces, cook the first-fruits and serve them to the cattle in new bamboo baskets; after that the men themselves partake of the new rice.<a href="#note_336" id="noteref_336" name="noteref_336"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">336</span></span></a> The Nahals, a forest tribe of the same region, worship the forest god Jharkhandi in the month of Chait, and until this rite has been performed they may not use the leaves or fruits of the <i xml:lang="la">Butea frondosa</i>, <i xml:lang="la">Phyllanthus emblica</i>, and mango trees. When the god is worshipped, they collect branches and leaves of these trees and offer cooked food to them: after that they begin to use the new leaves, fruit, and timber.<a href="#note_337" id="noteref_337" name="noteref_337"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">337</span></span></a> Again, when the Mannewars, another forest tribe of the Central Provinces, pick the flowers of the <i>mahua</i> tree (<i xml:lang="la">Bassia latifolia</i>), they worship the tree and offer it some of the liquor distilled from the new flowers, along with a fowl and a goat.<a href="#note_338" id="noteref_338" name="noteref_338"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">338</span></span></a> The principal festivals of the Parjas, a small tribe of the Central Provinces, are the feast of new vegetation in July, the feast of the new rice in August or September, and the feast of the new mango crop in April or May. At these feasts the new season's crop is eaten, and offerings of them are presented to the ancestors of the family, who are worshipped on these occasions.<a href="#note_339" id="noteref_339" name="noteref_339"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">339</span></span></a> In the Punjaub, when sugar-cane is planted, a woman puts on a necklace and walks round the field, winding thread on a spindle;<a href="#note_340" id="noteref_340" name="noteref_340"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">340</span></span></a> and when the sugar-cane is cut the first-fruits are offered on an altar, which is built close to the press and is sacred to the sugar-cane god. Afterwards the first-fruits are given to Brahmans. Also, when the women begin to pick the cotton, they go round the field eating rice-milk, the first mouthful of which they spit upon the field toward the west; and the first cotton picked is exchanged at the village shop for its weight in salt, which is prayed over and kept in the house till the picking is finished.<a href="#note_341" id="noteref_341" name="noteref_341"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">341</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the ancient Hindoos the first-fruits were sacrificed to the gods at the beginning of harvest, generally at the new or the full moon. There were two harvests in the year; the barley was reaped in spring and the rice in autumn. From the new grain, whether barley or rice, a sacrificial cake was prepared and set forth on twelve potsherds for the two great gods Indra and Agni; a pap or gruel of boiled grain, sodden either in water or milk, was offered to the Visve Devah, that is, to the common mob of deities; and a cake on one potsherd was presented to Heaven and Earth. The origin of these sacrifices of first-fruits was explained by the following myth. They say that the gods and their powerful rivals the Asuras once strove with each other for the mastery. In this strife the Asuras defiled, both by magic and by poison, the plants on which men and beasts subsist; for thus they hoped to get the better of the gods. Therefore neither man nor beast could eat food, and for lack of it they well nigh perished. When the gods heard of it, they said one to the other, <span class="tei tei-q">“Come let us rid the plants of the defilement,”</span> and they did so by means of the sacrifice. But they could not agree as to which of them should receive the sacrifices, so to decide this delicate question they ran a race, and Indra and Agni came in first; that is why the cake is offered to them on twelve potsherds, while the common mob of the gods have to put up with a simple pap or gruel. To this day, therefore, he who offers the first-fruits to the gods does it either because no one will then be able to defile the plants, neither by magic nor yet by poison; or perhaps he does it because the gods did so before him. Be that as it may, certain it is that he thereby renders both kinds of plants wholesome and innocuous, both the plants which men eat and the plants on which cattle graze; that indeed is the reason why the sacrificer sacrifices the first-fruits. And the priest's fee for the sacrifice is the first-born calf of the season, which is, as it were, the first-fruit of the cattle.<a href="#note_342" id="noteref_342" name="noteref_342"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">342</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The Kachins of Upper Burma worship the spirit (<i>nat</i>) of the earth every year before they sow their crops. The worship is performed by the chief on behalf of all the villagers, who contribute their offerings. The priest afterwards determines by exorcism which particular household shall start sowing first in order that the crop may be a good one. Then the household on which the lot has fallen goes out and sows its fields. When the crop is ripe, it may not be reaped until the household which was the first to sow its fields has gathered the first-fruits and offered them to its own domestic spirits (<i>nats</i>). This is usually done before the crop is quite ripe, in order that the reaping of the other crops may not be delayed.<a href="#note_343" id="noteref_343" name="noteref_343"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">343</span></span></a> The Chins, another people of Upper Burma, eat the first-fruits of their corn as a religious rite, but before doing so they offer some of the new corn or vegetables to their dead ancestors. They also offer the first-fruits to the goddess Pok Klai, a single glance of whose eyes is enough to give them a plentiful harvest of rice.<a href="#note_344" id="noteref_344" name="noteref_344"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">344</span></span></a> Among the Thay of Indo-China the first-fruits of the rice are offered at harvest to the guardian spirit of the family before the household may partake of the new crop. The guardian spirit of the family is the last ancestor who died; he mounts guard until he is relieved by his successor; his shrine is a corner of the house screened off by a low trellis of bamboo. But besides the first-fruits offered him at harvest this guardian spirit receives some of the parched grain in spring, at the time when the first thunder of the season is heard to mutter. The grain which is presented to him on this occasion was plucked from the crop before the rice was quite ripe, and it has been carefully kept to be offered to him when the first peal of thunder in spring announces the reviving energies of nature. When all is ready, the rice is served up together with fish, which have been caught for the purpose, on a table set in the corner which is sacred to the guardian spirit. A priest drones out a long invitation to the spirit to come and feast with his children; then the family sits down to table and consumes the offerings. At the close of the banquet the daughter-in-law of the deceased ancestor hangs up a basket containing rice and fish for his use in the corner, after which she closes the shrine for another year.<a href="#note_345" id="noteref_345" name="noteref_345"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">345</span></span></a> In Corea the first-fruits of all the crops used to be offered to the king with religious pomp, and he received almost divine honours from his subjects.<a href="#note_346" id="noteref_346" name="noteref_346"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">346</span></span></a> This suggests that, as I have already conjectured, the common practice, of presenting the first-fruits to kings is founded on a belief in their divinity.</p>
				<p>In the island of Tjumba, East Indies, a festival is held after harvest. Vessels filled with rice are presented as a thankoffering to the gods. Then the sacred stone at the foot of a palm-tree is sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed animal; and rice, with some of the flesh, is laid on the stone for the gods. The palm-tree is hung with lances and shields.<a href="#note_347" id="noteref_347" name="noteref_347"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">347</span></span></a> The Dyaks of Borneo hold a feast of first-fruits when the paddy or unhusked rice is ripe. The priestesses, accompanied by a gong and drum, go in procession to the farms and gather several bunches of the ripe paddy. These are brought back to the village, washed in coco-nut water, and laid round a bamboo altar, which at the harvest festivals is erected in the common room of the largest house. The altar is gaily decorated with white and red streamers, and is hung with the sweet-smelling blossom of the areca palm. The feast lasts two days, during which the village is tabooed; no one may leave it. Only fowls are killed, and dancing and gong-beating go on day and night. When the festival is over the people are free to get in their crops.<a href="#note_348" id="noteref_348" name="noteref_348"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">348</span></span></a> The pounding of the new paddy is the occasion of a harvest festival which is celebrated all over Celebes. The religious ceremonies which accompany the feast were witnessed by Dr. B. F. Matthes in July 1857. Two mats were spread on the ground, each with a pillow on it. On one of the pillows were placed a man's clothes and a sword, on the other a woman's clothes. These were seemingly intended to represent the deceased ancestors. Rice and water were deposited before the two dummy figures, which were also sprinkled with the new paddy. Moreover, dishes of rice were set down for the rest of the family and the slaves of the deceased. This was the end of the ceremony.<a href="#note_349" id="noteref_349" name="noteref_349"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">349</span></span></a> In Minahassa, a district of Celebes, the people have a festival of <span class="tei tei-q">“eating the new rice.”</span> Fowls or pigs are killed; some of the flesh, with rice and palm-wine, is set apart for the gods, and then the eating and drinking begin.<a href="#note_350" id="noteref_350" name="noteref_350"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">350</span></span></a> The people of Kobi and Sariputi, two villages on the north-east coast of Ceram, offer the first-fruits of the paddy, in the form of cooked rice, with tobacco and other things, to their ancestors as a token of gratitude. The ceremony is called <span class="tei tei-q">“feeding the dead.”</span><a href="#note_351" id="noteref_351" name="noteref_351"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">351</span></span></a> In the Tenimber and Timor-laut Islands, East Indies, the first-fruits of the paddy, along with live fowls and pigs, are offered to the <i>matmate</i>. The <i>matmate</i> are the spirits of their ancestors, which are worshipped as guardian-spirits or household gods. They are supposed to enter the house through an opening in the roof, and to take up their abode temporarily in their skulls, or in images of wood or ivory, in order to partake of the offerings and to help the family. They also assume the form of birds, pigs, crocodiles, turtles, sharks, and so forth.<a href="#note_352" id="noteref_352" name="noteref_352"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">352</span></span></a> In Amboyna, after the rice or other harvest has been gathered in, some of the new fruits are offered to the gods, and till this is done, the priests may by no means eat of them. A portion of the new rice, or whatever it may be, is boiled, and milk of the coco-nut is poured on it, mixed with Indian saffron. It is then taken to the place of sacrifice and offered to the god. Some people also pour out oil before the deity; and if any of the oil is left over, they take it home as a holy and priceless treasure, wherewith they smear the forehead and breast of sick people and whole people, in the firm conviction that the oil confers all kinds of blessings.<a href="#note_353" id="noteref_353" name="noteref_353"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">353</span></span></a> In the Kei Islands, to the south-west of New Guinea, the first-fruits are offered to Lir majoran, the god of husbandry, when the harvest is ripe.<a href="#note_354" id="noteref_354" name="noteref_354"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">354</span></span></a> After the rice has been reaped, the people of Nias deck the images of their ancestors with wreaths, and offer to them the first dishful of boiled rice, while they thank them for the blessings they have bestowed on the family.<a href="#note_355" id="noteref_355" name="noteref_355"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">355</span></span></a> The Irayas and Catalangans of Luzon, tribes of the Malay stock, but of mixed blood, worship chiefly the souls of their ancestors under the name of <i>anitos</i>, to whom they offer the first-fruits of the harvest. The <i>anitos</i> are household deities; some of them reside in pots in the corners of the houses; and miniature houses, standing near the family dwelling, are especially sacred to them.<a href="#note_356" id="noteref_356" name="noteref_356"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">356</span></span></a> When the Bagobos of the Philippines have got in their harvest of rice or maize, they will neither eat of it nor sell so much as a grain till they have made a pretence of feeding all their agricultural implements.<a href="#note_357" id="noteref_357" name="noteref_357"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">357</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The Bukaua of German New Guinea think that the spirits of their dead have power to make the fruits of the earth to grow. Accordingly when they have cleared a patch in the forest for cultivation and are planting their crops, they take particular care to plant slips near the tree-stumps which have been left standing in the field, because the spirits of their long dead ancestors are supposed to perch on them. While they plant, they call out the names of the dead, praying them to guard the field, so that their children, the living, may have food to eat and not suffer hunger. And similarly, when they plant stones shaped like taro bulbs in the ground, which are supposed to produce a fine crop of taro, they pray to their forefathers to grant them an abundance of the fruits. When the crops are ripe, the people fetch bundles of taro, clusters of bananas, sugar-canes, and vegetables from the fields and bring them back solemnly to the village; a feast is prepared and a portion of the new fruits, along with tobacco, betel, and dog's flesh, is put in a coco-nut shell and set on a scaffold in the house of the owner of the field, while he prays to the spirits of his forefathers, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ye who have guarded our field as we asked you to do, there is something for you; now look on us favourably also for the time to come.”</span> Afterwards, while the people are feasting, the owner privily stirs the contents of the coco-nut shell with his finger, and then calls the attention of the others to it as a proof that the spirits have partaken of the offering provided for them. Finally the food remaining in the shell is consumed by the banqueters.<a href="#note_358" id="noteref_358" name="noteref_358"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">358</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In certain tribes of Fiji <span class="tei tei-q">“the first-fruits of the yam harvest are presented to the ancestors in the Nanga [sacred enclosure] with great ceremony before the bulk of the crop is dug for the people's use, and no man may taste of the new yams until the presentation has been made. The yams thus offered are piled in the Great Nanga, and are allowed to rot there. If any one were impiously bold enough to appropriate them to his own use, he would be smitten with madness. The mission teacher before mentioned told me that, when he visited the Nanga he saw among the weeds with which it was overgrown, numerous yam vines which had sprung up out of the piles of decayed offerings. Great feasts are made at the presentations of the first-fruits, which are times of public rejoicing, and the Nanga itself is frequently spoken of as the <i>Mbaki</i>, or Harvest.”</span><a href="#note_359" id="noteref_359" name="noteref_359"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">359</span></span></a> In other parts of Fiji the practice with regard to the first-fruits seems to have been different, for we are told by another observer that <span class="tei tei-q">“the first-fruits of the yams, which are always presented at the principal temple of the district, become the property of the priests, and form their revenue, although the pretence of their being required for the use of the god is generally kept up.”</span><a href="#note_360" id="noteref_360" name="noteref_360"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">360</span></span></a> In Tana, one of the New Hebrides, the general name for gods appeared to be <i>aremha</i>, which meant <span class="tei tei-q">“a dead man.”</span> The spirits of departed ancestors were among the gods of the people. Chiefs who reached an advanced age were deified after their death, addressed by name, and prayed to on various occasions. They were supposed to preside especially over the growth of the yams and fruit-trees. The first-fruits were presented to them. A little of the new fruit was laid on a stone, or on a shelving branch of the tree, or on a rude temporary altar, made of a few sticks lashed together with strips of bark, in the form of a table, with its four feet stuck in the ground. All being quiet, the chief acted as high priest, and prayed aloud as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“Compassionate father! here is some food for you; eat it; be kind to us on account of it.”</span> Then all the people shouted. This took place about noon, and afterwards the assembled people feasted and danced till midnight or morning.<a href="#note_361" id="noteref_361" name="noteref_361"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">361</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Florida, one of the Solomon Islands, the canarium nut is much used in the native cookery, but formerly none might be eaten till the sacrifice of the first-fruits had been offered to the ghosts of the dead. This was done on behalf of a whole village by a man who inherited a knowledge of the way in which the sacrifice should be offered, and who accordingly had authority to open the season. When he saw that the time had come, he raised a shout early in the morning, then climbed a tree, cracked the nuts, ate some himself, and put some on the stones in his sacred place for the particular ghost whom he worshipped. Then all the people might gather the nuts for themselves. The chief offered food, in which the new nuts were mixed, on the stones of the village sanctuary; and every man who revered a ghost of his own did the same in his private sanctuary.<a href="#note_362" id="noteref_362" name="noteref_362"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">362</span></span></a> This sacrifice of first-fruits was witnessed by Mr. Woodford at the village of Aola, in the neighbouring island of Guadalcanar. The canarium nuts, or Solomon Island almonds, had been ripe for a week, and Mr. Woodford had expressed a wish to taste them, but he was told that this was quite impossible till the offering to the ghost had been made. As a native put it, <span class="tei tei-q">“Devil he eat first; all man he eat behind.”</span> All the inhabitants of the village adjourned to the sea-shore in groups of ten or twelve to perform the sacrifice. The party to which Mr. Woodford attached himself swept a space clean beneath the spreading branches of a Barringtonia, and there constructed half-a-dozen tiny altars, each about six inches square, out of dry sticks. On these altars they laid offerings of yams, taros, bananas, and a little flesh; and a few of the nuts were skinned and set up on sticks round about the altars. Fire was then made by the friction of wood, for matches might not be used for this purpose, though probably every man had a box of them in his bag. With the sacred flame thus produced the altars were kindled and the offerings consumed. When this was done, the women produced large flat cakes baked of a paste of pounded nuts, and these were eaten by all.<a href="#note_363" id="noteref_363" name="noteref_363"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">363</span></span></a> In Saa, another of the Solomon Islands, when the yams are ripe, the people fetch some from each garden to offer to the ghosts. Early in the morning all the male members of a family assemble at the sanctuary of the particular ancestral ghosts whom they revere. One of them goes with a yam into the holy place and cries with a loud voice to the ghosts, <span class="tei tei-q">“This is yours to eat,”</span> and with that he sets the yam beside the skull which is in the sanctuary. The others call quietly upon all the ancestors and present their yams, which are many in number, because one from each garden is given to each of the ghosts. Moreover, if any man has a relic of the dead at home, such as a head, or bones, or hair, he takes back a yam to his house and places it beside the head or whatever it may be. In the same island, as in Florida, the new canarium nuts may not be eaten until the first-fruits have been offered to the ghosts. Moreover, the first flying-fish of the season must be sacrificed to these spirits of the dead before the living are allowed to partake of the fish. The ghosts to whom the flying-fish are offered have the form of sharks. Some of them have sanctuaries ashore, where images of sharks are set up; and the flying-fish are laid before these images. Other shark-ghosts have no place on shore; so the fish offered to them are taken out to sea and shredded into the water, while the names of the ghosts are called out.<a href="#note_364" id="noteref_364" name="noteref_364"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">364</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In some of the Kingsmill Islands the god most commonly worshipped was called Tubuériki. He was represented by a flat coral stone, of irregular shape, about three feet long by eighteen inches wide, set up on end in the open air. Leaves of the coco-nut palm were tied about it, considerably increasing its size and height. The leaves were changed every month, that they might be always fresh. The worship paid to the god consisted in repeating prayers before the stone, and laying beside it a portion of the food prepared by the people for their own use. This they did at their daily meals, at festivals, and whenever they specially wished to propitiate the deity. The first-fruits of the season were always offered to him. Every family of distinction had one of these stones which was considered rather in the light of a family altar than as an idol.<a href="#note_365" id="noteref_365" name="noteref_365"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">365</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In the Tonga Islands the first-fruits of the year were offered with solemn ceremony to the sacred chief Tooitonga, who was regarded as divine. The ceremony generally took place about October, and the people believed that if the rite were neglected the vengeance of the gods would fall in a signal manner upon them. The following is a description of the festival as it was celebrated in the days when a European flag rarely floated among the islands of the Pacific: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i>Inachi.</i> This word means, literally, a share or portion of anything that is to be or has been distributed out: but in the sense here mentioned it means that portion of the fruits of the earth, and other eatables, which is offered to the gods in the person of the divine chief Tooitonga, which allotment is made once a year, just before the yams in general are arrived at a state of maturity; those which are used in this ceremony being of a kind which admit of being planted sooner than others, and, consequently, they are the first fruits of the yam season. The object of this offering is to insure the protection of the gods, that their favour may be extended to the welfare of the nation generally, and in particular to the productions of the earth, of which yams are the most important.</span></p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The time for planting most kinds of yams is about the latter end of July, but the species called <i>caho-caho</i>, which is always used in this ceremony, is put in the ground about a month before, when, on each plantation, there is a small piece of land chosen and fenced in, for the purpose of growing a couple of yams of the above description. As soon as they have arrived at a state of maturity, the <i>How</i> [the King] sends a messenger to Tooitonga, stating that the yams for the <i>inachi</i> are fit to be taken up, and requesting that he would appoint a day for the ceremony: he generally fixes on the tenth day afterwards, reckoning the following day for the first. There are no particular preparations made till the day before the ceremony: at night, however, the sound of the conch is heard occasionally in different parts of the islands, and as the day of the ceremony approaches it becomes more frequent, so that the people of almost every plantation sound the conch three or four times, which, breaking in upon the silence of the night, has a pleasing effect, particularly at Vavaoo, where the number of woods and hills send back repeated echoes, adding greatly to the effect. The day before the ceremony, the yams are dug up, and ornamented with a kind of ribbons prepared from the inner membrane of the leaf of a species of pandanus, and dyed red; when thus prepared, it is called <i>mellecoola</i> and is wrapped round the yam, beginning at one end, and running round spirally to the other, when it is brought back in the opposite direction, the turns crossing each other in a very neat manner. As the ceremony is always performed at the island where Tooitonga chooses to reside, the distant islands must make these preparations two or three days beforehand, that the yams, etc., may be sent in time to Vavaoo, where we will suppose the affair is to take place. The ninth day then is employed in preparing and collecting the yams and other provisions, such as fish, cava root, and <i>mahoa</i>, and getting ready mats, <i>gnatoo</i>, and bundles of <i>mellecoola</i>: but the yams only are to be carried in the procession about to be described....</span>
				</p>
				<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The sun has scarcely set when the sound of the conch begins again to echo through the island, increasing as the night advances. At the Mooa [capital], and all the plantations, the voices of men and women are heard singing <i>Nófo óooa tegger gnaoóe, óooa gnaoóe</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Rest thou, doing no work; thou shalt not work.’</span> This increases till midnight, men generally singing the first part of the sentence, and the women the last, to produce a more pleasing effect: it then subsides for three or four hours, and again increases as the sun rises. Nobody, however, is seen stirring out in the public roads till about eight o'clock, when the people from all quarters of the island are seen advancing towards the Mooa, and canoes from all the other islands are landing their men; so that all the inhabitants of Tonga seem approaching by sea and land, singing and sounding the conch. At the Mooa itself the universal bustle of preparation is seen and heard; and the different processions entering from various quarters, of men and women, all dressed up in new <i>gnatoos</i>, ornamented with red ribbons and wreaths of flowers, and the men armed with spears and clubs, betoken the importance of the ceremony about to be performed. Each party brings in its yams in a basket, which is carried in the arms with great care, by the principal vassal of the chief to whom the plantation may belong. The baskets are deposited in the <i>malái</i><a href="#note_366" id="noteref_366" name="noteref_366"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">366</span></span></a> (in the <i>Mooa</i>), and some of them begin to employ themselves in slinging the yams, each upon the centre of a pole about eight or nine feet long, and four inches diameter. The proceedings are regulated by attending matabooles.<a href="#note_367" id="noteref_367" name="noteref_367"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">367</span></span></a> The yams being all slung, each pole is carried by two men upon their shoulders, one walking before the other, and the yam hanging between them, ornamented with red ribbons. The procession begins to move towards the grave of the last Tooitonga (which is generally in the neighbourhood, or the grave of one of his family will do), the men advancing in a single line, every two bearing a yam, with a slow and measured pace, sinking at every step, as if their burden were of immense weight. In the meantime the chiefs and matabooles are seated in a semicircle before the grave, with their heads bowed down, and their hands clasped before them.”</span> The procession then marched round the grave twice or thrice in a great circle, the conchs blowing and the men singing. Next the yams, still suspended from the poles, were deposited before the grave, and their bearers sat down beside them. One of the <i>matabooles</i> of Tooitonga, seating himself before the grave, a little in advance of the men, now addressed the gods generally, and afterwards particularly, mentioning the late Tooitonga, and the names of several others. He thanked them for their divine bounty in favouring the land with the prospect of so good a harvest, and prayed that their beneficence might be continued in future. When he had finished, the men rose and resumed their loads, and after parading two or three times before the grave, marched back to the <i>malái</i> the same way they came, singing and blowing the conchs as before. The chiefs and <i>matabooles</i> soon followed to the same place, where the yams had been again deposited and loosened from the poles, though they still retained their ornaments. Here the company sat down in a great circle, presided over by Tooitonga, while the king and other great chiefs retired into the background among the mass of the people. Then the other articles that formed part of the <i>inachi</i> were brought forward, consisting of dried fish, mats, etc., which, with the yams, were divided into shares by one of the <i>matabooles</i> of Tooitonga. About a fourth was allotted to the gods, and appropriated by the priests; about a half fell to the king; and the remainder belonged to Tooitonga. The materials of the <i>inachi</i> having been carried away, the company set themselves to drink <i>cava</i>. Some <i>cava</i> root was brought and prepared; a large quantity of provisions, perhaps a hundred and fifty baskets-full, was set forth, and a small part of it was distributed to be eaten with the <i>cava</i>. While the infusion was preparing, a <i>mataboole</i> made a speech to the people, saying that, as they had performed this important ceremony, the gods would protect them and grant them long lives, if only they continued to observe the religious rites and to pay due respect to the chiefs. When the <i>cava</i> was all drunk, the circle separated, and the provisions were shared out to each chief according to his rank. The day concluded with wrestling, boxing, and so forth, and then the night dances began. When these were ended, the people went home perfectly assured of the protection of the gods. At this ceremony, we are informed, the quantity of provisions distributed was incredible, and the people looked upon it as a very heavy tribute.<a href="#note_368" id="noteref_368" name="noteref_368"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">368</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In this Tongan festival the solemn presentation of the first-fruits to the divine chief at the grave of his predecessor is highly significant: it confirms the conclusion which we have already reached, that wherever the first-fruits are paid to the chief, it is rather in his religious than in his civil capacity that he receives them. It is true that the king of Tonga received a large share of the first-fruits, indeed a larger share than was allotted to the divine chief; but it is very noticeable that while the division of the first-fruits was taking place under the presidency of the divine chief, the king and the other great chiefs retired from the scene and mingled with the mass of the people, as if to indicate that as mere laymen they had no right to participate in a religious rite of such deep solemnity.</p>
				<p>The Samoans used to present the first-fruits to the spirits (<i>aitus</i>) and chiefs.<a href="#note_369" id="noteref_369" name="noteref_369"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">369</span></span></a> For example, a family whose god was in the form of an eel presented the first-fruits of their taro plantations to the eel.<a href="#note_370" id="noteref_370" name="noteref_370"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">370</span></span></a> In Tahiti <span class="tei tei-q">“the first fish taken periodically on their shores, together with a number of kinds regarded as sacred, were conveyed to the altar. The first-fruits of their orchards and gardens were also <i>taumaha</i>, or offered, with a portion of their live stock, which consisted of pigs, dogs, and fowls, as it was supposed death would be inflicted on the owner or the occupant of the land, from which the god should not receive such acknowledgment.”</span><a href="#note_371" id="noteref_371" name="noteref_371"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">371</span></span></a> In Huahine, one of the Society Islands, the first-fruits were presented to the god Tani. A poor person was expected to bring two of the earliest fruits gathered, of whatever kind; a <i>raatira</i> had to bring ten, and chiefs and princes had to bring more, according to their rank and riches. They carried the fruits to the temple, where they threw them down on the ground, with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“Here, Tani, I have brought you something to eat.”</span><a href="#note_372" id="noteref_372" name="noteref_372"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">372</span></span></a> The chief gods of the Easter Islanders were Make-Make and Haua. To these they offered the first of all the produce of the ground.<a href="#note_373" id="noteref_373" name="noteref_373"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">373</span></span></a> Amongst the Maoris the offering of the first-fruits of the sweet potatoes to Pani, son of Rongo, the god of sweet potatoes, was a solemn religious ceremony. The crop of sweet potatoes (<i>kumara</i>) was sacred, and all persons engaged in its cultivation were also sacred or tabooed; they might not quit the place nor undertake any other work.<a href="#note_374" id="noteref_374" name="noteref_374"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">374</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It has been affirmed that the old Prussians offered the first-fruits of their crops and of their fishing to the god Curcho, but doubt rests on the statement.<a href="#note_375" id="noteref_375" name="noteref_375"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">375</span></span></a> We have seen that the Athenians and other Greek peoples offered the first-fruits of the wheat and barley harvests to Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis.<a href="#note_376" id="noteref_376" name="noteref_376"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">376</span></span></a> The Troezenians sacrificed the first-fruits to Poseidon, whom they worshipped as the guardian deity of their city.<a href="#note_377" id="noteref_377" name="noteref_377"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">377</span></span></a> In Attica the first-fruits of the vintage were presented to Icarius and Erigone.<a href="#note_378" id="noteref_378" name="noteref_378"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">378</span></span></a> The Romans sacrificed the first ears of corn to Ceres, and the first of the new wine to Liber; and until the priests had offered these sacrifices, the people might not eat the new corn nor drink the new wine.<a href="#note_379" id="noteref_379" name="noteref_379"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">379</span></span></a> In various parts of ancient Italy the vintage was solemnly inaugurated by the priests. At Rome the duty devolved on the Flamen Dialis, who sacrificed a lamb to Jupiter and then gathered the first grapes over the entrails of the victim. Till this ceremony had been performed, the new wine might not be brought into the city.<a href="#note_380" id="noteref_380" name="noteref_380"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">380</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The Thompson River Indians of British Columbia used to offer the first berries of the season to the earth, or more generally to the mountains. The offering was made by an old grey-haired person, who danced and held out the fruit towards the mountain-tops. The rest of the people painted their faces red and danced for some time.<a href="#note_381" id="noteref_381" name="noteref_381"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">381</span></span></a> The Okanaken Indians of British Columbia <span class="tei tei-q">“observed first-fruits ceremonies. When the first berries or roots were ripe, the chief would send out his wife or eldest daughter to gather a portion. The whole community would then come together, and prayers would be offered to those spirits of the sky who were supposed to preside over the operations of nature, portions of the fruit or roots would be distributed to all present, after which any one was free to gather all he or she desired; but no one would think of picking a berry or digging a root until after the feast had been held.”</span><a href="#note_382" id="noteref_382" name="noteref_382"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">382</span></span></a> When the ears of maize were formed, the Quiches of Central America gathered the first-fruits and carried them to the priests; moreover, they baked loaves or cakes, which they offered to the idol who guarded their fields, but afterwards these cakes were given to the poor or the infirm to eat.<a href="#note_383" id="noteref_383" name="noteref_383"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">383</span></span></a> It was the custom of the Arkansas Indians to offer the first-fruits of the ripe maize and melons to the Master of Life; even children would die of hunger rather than touch the new fruits before this offering had been made. Some of the new maize, melons, and other fruits were minced up with the carcase of a dog in the presence of the old men, who alone were privileged to assist at this solemn rite. Then, after performing certain ceremonies, the old men began to dance, and some young girls, wound up to a pitch of frenzy, threw themselves on the offering and bolted it in an instant. Thereupon the old men seized the damsels and ducked them in the river Arkansas, which had a sobering influence on the minds of the devotees.<a href="#note_384" id="noteref_384" name="noteref_384"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">384</span></span></a> From this account we may perhaps infer that in eating the new fruits the girls were believed to be inspired by the Master of Life, who thus consumed the offering by deputy. The chief solemnity of the Natchez, an Indian tribe on the Lower Mississippi, was the Harvest Festival or the Festival of New Fire. An early account of this ceremony has been already submitted to the reader,<a href="#note_385" id="noteref_385" name="noteref_385"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">385</span></span></a> but it may not be amiss to add here for comparison the later description by Chateaubriand, which differs from the other in some particulars, and lays stress on the sacrifice rather than on the sacrament of first-fruits. According to Chateaubriand, then, when the time for the festival drew near, a crier went through the villages calling upon the people to prepare new vessels and new garments, to wash their houses, and to burn the old grain, the old garments, and the old utensils in a common fire. He also proclaimed an amnesty to criminals. Next day he appeared again, commanding the people to fast for three days, to abstain from all pleasures, and to make use of the medicine of purification. Thereupon all the people took some drops extracted from a root which they called the <span class="tei tei-q">“root of blood.”</span> It was a kind of plantain and distilled a red liquor which acted as a violent emetic. During their three days' fast the people kept silence. At the end of it the crier proclaimed that the festival would begin on the following day. So next morning, as soon as it began to grow light in the sky, the people streamed from all quarters towards the temple of the Sun. The temple was a large building with two doors, one opening to the east, the other to the west. On this morning the eastern door of the temple stood open. Facing the eastern door was an altar, placed so as to catch the first beams of the rising sun. An image of a <i>chouchouacha</i> (a small marsupial) stood upon the altar; on its right was an image of a rattlesnake, on its left an image of a marmoset. Before these images a fire of oak-bark burned perpetually. Once a year only, on the eve of the Harvest Festival, was the sacred flame suffered to die out. To the right of the altar, on the morning of this holy day, stood the great chief, who took his title and traced his descent from the Sun. To the left of the altar stood his wife. Round them were grouped, according to their ranks, the war chiefs, the sachems, the heralds, and the young braves. In front of the altar were piled bundles of dry reeds, stacked in concentric rings.</p>
				<p>The high priest, standing on the threshold of the temple, kept his eyes fixed on the eastern horizon. Before presiding at the festival he had to plunge thrice into the Mississippi. In his hands he held two pieces of dry wood which he kept rubbing slowly against each other, muttering magic words. At his side two acolytes held two cups filled with a kind of black sherbet. All the women, their backs turned to the east, each leaning with one hand on her rude mattock and supporting her infant with the other, stood in a great semicircle at the gate of the temple. Profound silence reigned throughout the multitude while the priest watched attentively the growing light in the east. As soon as the diffused light of dawn began to be shot with beams of fire, he quickened the motion of the two pieces of wood which he held in his hands; and at the moment when the upper edge of the sun's disc appeared above the horizon, fire flashed from the wood and was caught in tinder. At the same instant the women outside the temple faced round and held up their infants and their mattocks to the rising sun.</p>
				<p>The great chief and his wife now drank the black liquor. The priests kindled the circle of dried reeds; fire was set to the heap of oak-bark on the altar, and from this sacred flame all the hearths of the village were rekindled. No sooner were the circles of reeds consumed than the chief's wife came from the temple and placing herself at the head of the women marched in procession to the harvest-fields, whither the men were not allowed to follow them. They went to gather the first sheaves of maize, and returned to the temple bearing them on their heads. Some of the sheaves they presented to the high priest, who laid them on the altar. Others they used to bake the unleavened bread which was to be eaten in the evening. The eastern door of the sanctuary was now closed, and the western door was opened.</p>
				<p>When day began to decline, the multitude assembled once more at the temple, this time at its western gate, where they formed a great crescent, with the horns turned towards the west. The unleavened bread was held up and presented to the setting sun, and a priest struck up a hymn in praise of his descending light. When darkness had fallen the whole plain twinkled with fires, round which the people feasted; and the sounds of music and revelry broke the silence of night.<a href="#note_386" id="noteref_386" name="noteref_386"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">386</span></span></a></p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
