<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter I. The Burden Of Royalty.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. Royal and Priestly Taboos.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>At a certain stage of early society the king or priest is often thought to be endowed with supernatural powers or to be an incarnation of a deity, and consistently with this belief the course of nature is supposed to be more or less under his control, and he is held responsible for bad weather, failure of the crops, and similar calamities.<a href="#note_1" id="noteref_1" name="noteref_1"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1</span></span></a> To some extent it appears to be assumed that the king's power over nature, like that over his subjects and slaves, is exerted through definite acts of will; and therefore if drought, famine, pestilence, or storms arise, the people attribute the misfortune to the negligence or guilt of their king, and punish him accordingly with stripes and bonds, or, if he remains obdurate, with deposition and death.<a href="#note_2" id="noteref_2" name="noteref_2"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">2</span></span></a> Sometimes, however, the course of nature, while regarded as dependent on the king, is supposed to be partly independent of his will. His person is considered, if we may express it so, as the dynamical centre of the universe, from which lines of force radiate to all quarters of the heaven; so that any motion of his—the turning of his head, the lifting of his hand—instantaneously affects and may seriously disturb some part of nature. He is the point of support on which hangs the balance of the world, and the slightest irregularity on his part may overthrow the delicate equipoise. The greatest care must, therefore, be taken both by and of him; and his whole life, down to its minutest details, must be so regulated that no act of his, voluntary or involuntary, may disarrange or upset the established order of nature. Of this class of monarchs the Mikado or Dairi, the spiritual emperor of Japan, is or rather used to be a typical example. He is an incarnation of the sun goddess, the deity who rules the universe, gods and men included; once a year all the gods wait upon him and spend a month at his court. During that month, the name of which means <span class="tei tei-q">“without gods,”</span> no one frequents the temples, for they are believed to be deserted.<a href="#note_3" id="noteref_3" name="noteref_3"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">3</span></span></a> The Mikado receives from his people and assumes in his official proclamations and decrees the title of <span class="tei tei-q">“manifest or incarnate deity”</span> (<i xml:lang="ja">Akitsu Kami</i>) and he claims a general authority over the gods of Japan.<a href="#note_4" id="noteref_4" name="noteref_4"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">4</span></span></a> For example, in an official decree of the year 646 the emperor is described as <span class="tei tei-q">“the incarnate god who governs the universe.”</span><a href="#note_5" id="noteref_5" name="noteref_5"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">5</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The following description of the Mikado's mode of life was written about two hundred years ago:—<a href="#note_6" id="noteref_6" name="noteref_6"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">6</span></span></a></p>
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Even to this day the princes descended of this family more particularly those who sit on the throne, are looked upon as persons most holy in themselves, and as Popes by birth. And, in order to preserve these advantageous notions in the minds of their subjects, they are obliged to take an uncommon care of their sacred persons, and to do such things, which, examined according to the customs of other nations, would be thought ridiculous and impertinent. It will not be improper to give a few instances of it. He thinks that it would be very prejudicial to his dignity and holiness to touch the ground with his feet; for this reason when he intends to go anywhere, he must be carried thither on men's shoulders. Much less will they suffer that he should expose his sacred person to the open air, and the sun is not thought worthy to shine on his head. There is such a holiness ascribed to all the parts of his body that he dares to cut off neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails. However, lest he should grow too dirty, they may clean him in the night when he is asleep; because, they say, that which is taken from his body at that time, hath been stolen from him, and that such a theft doth not prejudice his holiness or dignity. In ancient times, he was obliged to sit on the throne for some hours every morning, with the imperial crown on his head, but to sit altogether like a statue, without stirring either hands or feet, head or eyes, nor indeed any part of his body, because, by this means, it was thought that he could preserve peace and tranquillity in his empire; for if, unfortunately, he turned himself on one side or the other, or if he looked a good while towards any part of his dominions, it was apprehended that war, famine, fire, or some other great misfortune was near at hand to desolate the country. But it having been afterwards discovered, that the imperial crown was the palladium, which by its immobility<a href="#note_7" id="noteref_7" name="noteref_7"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">7</span></span></a> could preserve peace in the empire, it was thought expedient to deliver his imperial person, consecrated only to idleness and pleasures, from this burthensome duty, and therefore the crown is at present placed on the throne for some hours every morning. His victuals must be dressed every time in new pots, and served at table in new dishes: both are very clean and neat, but made only of common clay; that without any considerable expense they may be laid aside, or broke, after they have served once. They are generally broke, for fear they should come into the hands of laymen, for they believe religiously, that if any layman should presume to eat his food out of these sacred dishes, it would swell and inflame his mouth and throat. The like ill effect is dreaded from the Dairi's sacred habits; for they believe that if a layman should wear them, without the Emperor's express leave or command, they would occasion swellings and pains in all parts of his body.”</span> To the same effect an earlier account of the Mikado says: <span class="tei tei-q">“It was considered as a shameful degradation for him even to touch the ground with his foot. The sun and moon were not even permitted to shine upon his head. None of the superfluities of the body were ever taken from him, neither his hair, his beard, nor his nails were cut. Whatever he eat was dressed in new vessels.”</span><a href="#note_8" id="noteref_8" name="noteref_8"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">8</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Similar priestly or rather divine kings are found, at a lower level of barbarism, on the west coast of Africa. At Shark Point near Cape Padron, in Lower Guinea, lives the priestly king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He may not touch a woman nor leave his house; indeed he may not even quit his chair, in which he is obliged to sleep sitting, for if he lay down no wind would arise and navigation would be stopped. He regulates storms, and in general maintains a wholesome and equable state of the atmosphere.<a href="#note_9" id="noteref_9" name="noteref_9"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">9</span></span></a> On Mount Agu in Togo, a German possession in West Africa, there lives a fetish or spirit called Bagba, who is of great importance for the whole of the surrounding country. The power of giving or withholding rain is ascribed to him, and he is lord of the winds, including the Harmattan, the dry, hot wind which blows from the interior. His priest dwells in a house on the highest peak of the mountain, where he keeps the winds bottled up in huge jars. Applications for rain, too, are made to him, and he does a good business in amulets, which consist of the teeth and claws of leopards. Yet though his power is great and he is indeed the real chief of the land, the rule of the fetish forbids him ever to leave the mountain, and he must spend the whole of his life on its summit. Only once a year may he come down to make purchases in the market; but even then he may not set foot in the hut of any mortal man, and must return to his place of exile the same day. The business of government in the villages is conducted by subordinate chiefs, who are appointed by him.<a href="#note_10" id="noteref_10" name="noteref_10"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">10</span></span></a> In the West African kingdom of Congo there was a supreme pontiff called Chitomé or Chitombé, whom the negroes regarded as a god on earth and all-powerful in heaven. Hence before they would taste the new crops they offered him the first-fruits, fearing that manifold misfortunes would befall them if they broke this rule. When he left his residence to visit other places within his jurisdiction, all married people had to observe strict continence the whole time he was out; for it was supposed that any act of incontinence would prove fatal to him. And if he were to die a natural death, they thought that the world would perish, and the earth, which he alone sustained by his power and merit, would immediately be annihilated.<a href="#note_11" id="noteref_11" name="noteref_11"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">11</span></span></a> Similarly in Humbe, a kingdom of Angola, the incontinence of young people under the age of puberty used to be a capital crime, because it was believed to entail the death of the king within the year. Of late the death penalty has been commuted for a fine of ten oxen inflicted on each of the culprits. This commutation has attracted thousands of dissolute youth to Humbe from the neighbouring tribes, among whom the old penalty is still rigorously exacted.<a href="#note_12" id="noteref_12" name="noteref_12"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">12</span></span></a> Amongst the semi-barbarous nations of the New World, at the date of the Spanish conquest, there were found hierarchies or theocracies like those of Japan;<a href="#note_13" id="noteref_13" name="noteref_13"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">13</span></span></a> in particular, the high pontiff of the Zapotecs in Southern Mexico appears to have presented a close parallel to the Mikado. A powerful rival to the king himself, this spiritual lord governed Yopaa, one of the chief cities of the kingdom, with absolute dominion. It is impossible, we are told, to overrate the reverence in which he was held. He was looked on as a god whom the earth was not worthy to hold nor the sun to shine upon. He profaned his sanctity if he even touched the ground with his foot. The officers who bore his palanquin on their shoulders were members of the highest families; he hardly deigned to look on anything around him; and all who met him fell with their faces to the earth, fearing that death would overtake them if they saw even his shadow. A rule of continence was regularly imposed on the Zapotec priests, especially upon the high pontiff; but <span class="tei tei-q">“on certain days in each year, which were generally celebrated with feasts and dances, it was customary for the high priest to become drunk. While in this state, seeming to belong neither to heaven nor to earth, one of the most beautiful of the virgins consecrated to the service of the gods was brought to him.”</span> If the child she bore him was a son, he was brought up as a prince of the blood, and the eldest son succeeded his father on the pontifical throne.<a href="#note_14" id="noteref_14" name="noteref_14"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">14</span></span></a> The supernatural powers attributed to this pontiff are not specified, but probably they resembled those of the Mikado and Chitomé.</p>
					<p>Wherever, as in Japan and West Africa, it is supposed that the order of nature, and even the existence of the world, is bound up with the life of the king or priest, it is clear that he must be regarded by his subjects as a source both of infinite blessing and of infinite danger. On the one hand, the people have to thank him for the rain and sunshine which foster the fruits of the earth, for the wind which brings ships to their coasts, and even for the solid ground beneath their feet. But what he gives he can refuse; and so close is the dependence of nature on his person, so delicate the balance of the system of forces whereof he is the centre, that the least irregularity on his part may set up a tremor which shall shake the earth to its foundations. And if nature may be disturbed by the slightest involuntary act of the king, it is easy to conceive the convulsion which his death might provoke. The natural death of the Chitomé, as we have seen, was thought to entail the destruction of all things. Clearly, therefore, out of a regard for their own safety, which might be imperilled by any rash act of the king, and still more by his death, the people will exact of their king or priest a strict conformity to those rules, the observance of which is deemed necessary for his own preservation, and consequently for the preservation of his people and the world. The idea that early kingdoms are despotisms in which the people exist only for the sovereign, is wholly inapplicable to the monarchies we are considering. On the contrary, the sovereign in them exists only for his subjects; his life is only valuable so long as he discharges the duties of his position by ordering the course of nature for his people's benefit. So soon as he fails to do so, the care, the devotion, the religious homage which they had hitherto lavished on him cease and are changed into hatred and contempt; he is dismissed ignominiously, and may be thankful if he escapes with his life. Worshipped as a god one day, he is killed as a criminal the next. But in this changed behaviour of the people there is nothing capricious or inconsistent. On the contrary, their conduct is entirely of a piece. If their king is their god, he is or should be also their preserver; and if he will not preserve them, he must make room for another who will. So long, however, as he answers their expectations, there is no limit to the care which they take of him, and which they compel him to take of himself. A king of this sort lives hedged in by a ceremonious etiquette, a network of prohibitions and observances, of which the intention is not to contribute to his dignity, much less to his comfort, but to restrain him from conduct which, by disturbing the harmony of nature, might involve himself, his people, and the universe in one common catastrophe. Far from adding to his comfort, these observances, by trammelling his every act, annihilate his freedom and often render the very life, which it is their object to preserve, a burden and sorrow to him.</p>
					<p>Of the supernaturally endowed kings of Loango it is said that the more powerful a king is, the more taboos is he bound to observe; they regulate all his actions, his walking and his standing, his eating and drinking, his sleeping and waking.<a href="#note_15" id="noteref_15" name="noteref_15"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">15</span></span></a> To these restraints the heir to the throne is subject from infancy; but as he advances in life the number of abstinences and ceremonies which he must observe increases, <span class="tei tei-q">“until at the moment that he ascends the throne he is lost in the ocean of rites and taboos.”</span><a href="#note_16" id="noteref_16" name="noteref_16"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">16</span></span></a> In the crater of an extinct volcano, enclosed on all sides by grassy slopes, lie the scattered huts and yam-fields of Riabba, the capital of the native king of Fernando Po. This mysterious being lives in the lowest depths of the crater, surrounded by a harem of forty women, and covered, it is said, with old silver coins. Naked savage as he is, he yet exercises far more influence in the island than the Spanish governor at Santa Isabel. In him the conservative spirit of the Boobies or aboriginal inhabitants of the island is, as it were, incorporate. He has never seen a white man and, according to the firm conviction of all the Boobies, the sight of a pale face would cause his instant death. He cannot bear to look upon the sea; indeed it is said that he may never see it even in the distance, and that therefore he wears away his life with shackles on his legs in the dim twilight of his hut. Certain it is that he has never set foot on the beach. With the exception of his musket and knife, he uses nothing that comes from the whites; European cloth never touches his person, and he scorns tobacco, rum, and even salt.<a href="#note_17" id="noteref_17" name="noteref_17"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">17</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Among the Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast, in West Africa, <span class="tei tei-q">“the king is at the same time high priest. In this quality he was, particularly in former times, unapproachable by his subjects. Only by night was he allowed to quit his dwelling in order to bathe and so forth. None but his representative, the so-called <span class="tei tei-q">‘visible king,’</span> with three chosen elders might converse with him, and even they had to sit on an ox-hide with their backs turned to him. He might not see any European nor any horse, nor might he look upon the sea, for which reason he was not allowed to quit his capital even for a few moments. These rules have been disregarded in recent times.”</span><a href="#note_18" id="noteref_18" name="noteref_18"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">18</span></span></a> The king of Dahomey himself is subject to the prohibition of beholding the sea,<a href="#note_19" id="noteref_19" name="noteref_19"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">19</span></span></a> and so are the kings of Loango<a href="#note_20" id="noteref_20" name="noteref_20"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">20</span></span></a> and Great Ardra in Guinea.<a href="#note_21" id="noteref_21" name="noteref_21"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">21</span></span></a> The sea is the fetish of the Eyeos, to the north-west of Dahomey, and they and their king are threatened with death by their priests if ever they dare to look on it.<a href="#note_22" id="noteref_22" name="noteref_22"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">22</span></span></a> It is believed that the king of Cayor in Senegal would infallibly die within the year if he were to cross a river or an arm of the sea.<a href="#note_23" id="noteref_23" name="noteref_23"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">23</span></span></a> In Mashonaland down to recent times the chiefs would not cross certain rivers, particularly the Rurikwi and the Nyadiri; and the custom was still strictly observed by at least one chief within the last few years. <span class="tei tei-q">“On no account will the chief cross the river. If it is absolutely necessary for him to do so, he is blindfolded and carried across with shouting and singing. Should he walk across, he will go blind or die and certainly lose the chieftainship.”</span><a href="#note_24" id="noteref_24" name="noteref_24"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">24</span></span></a> So among the Mahafalys and Sakalavas in the south of Madagascar some kings are forbidden to sail on the sea or to cross certain rivers.<a href="#note_25" id="noteref_25" name="noteref_25"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">25</span></span></a> The horror of the sea is not peculiar to kings. The Basutos are said to share it instinctively, though they have never seen salt water, and live hundreds of miles from the Indian Ocean.<a href="#note_26" id="noteref_26" name="noteref_26"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">26</span></span></a> The Egyptian priests loathed the sea, and called it the foam of Typhon; they were forbidden to set salt on their table, and they would not speak to pilots because they got their living by the sea; hence too they would not eat fish, and the hieroglyphic symbol for hatred was a fish.<a href="#note_27" id="noteref_27" name="noteref_27"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">27</span></span></a> When the Indians of the Peruvian Andes were sent by the Spaniards to work in the hot valleys of the coast, the vast ocean which they saw before them as they descended the Cordillera was dreaded by them as a cause of disease; hence they prayed to it that they might not fall ill. This they all did without exception, even the little children.<a href="#note_28" id="noteref_28" name="noteref_28"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">28</span></span></a> Similarly the inland people of Lampong in Sumatra are said to pay a kind of adoration to the sea, and to make it an offering of cakes and sweetmeats when they behold it for the first time, deprecating its power of doing them mischief.<a href="#note_29" id="noteref_29" name="noteref_29"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">29</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Among the Sakalavas of southern Madagascar the chief is regarded as a sacred being, but <span class="tei tei-q">“he is held in leash by a crowd of restrictions, which regulate his behaviour like that of the emperor of China. He can undertake nothing whatever unless the sorcerers have declared the omens favourable: he may not eat warm food: on certain days he may not quit his hut; and so on.”</span><a href="#note_30" id="noteref_30" name="noteref_30"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">30</span></span></a> Among some of the hill tribes of Assam both the headman and his wife have to observe many taboos in respect of food; thus they may not eat buffalo, pork, dog, fowl, or tomatoes. The headman must be chaste, the husband of one wife, and he must separate himself from her on the eve of a general or public observance of taboo. In one group of tribes the headman is forbidden to eat in a strange village, and under no provocation whatever may he utter a word of abuse. Apparently the people imagine that the violation of any of these taboos by a headman would bring down misfortune on the whole village.<a href="#note_31" id="noteref_31" name="noteref_31"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">31</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The ancient kings of Ireland, as well as the kings of the four provinces of Leinster, Munster, Connaught, and Ulster, were subject to certain quaint prohibitions or taboos, on the due observance of which the prosperity of the people and the country, as well as their own, was supposed to depend. Thus, for example, the sun might not rise on the king of Ireland in his bed at Tara, the old capital of Erin; he was forbidden to alight on Wednesday at Magh Breagh, to traverse Magh Cuillinn after sunset, to incite his horse at Fan-Chomair, to go in a ship upon the water the Monday after Bealltaine (May day), and to leave the track of his army upon Ath Maighne the Tuesday after All-Hallows. The king of Leinster might not go round Tuath Laighean left-hand-wise on Wednesday, nor sleep between the Dothair (Dodder) and the Duibhlinn<a href="#note_32" id="noteref_32" name="noteref_32"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">32</span></span></a> with his head inclining to one side, nor encamp for nine days on the plains of Cualann, nor travel the road of Duibhlinn on Monday, nor ride a dirty black-heeled horse across Magh Maistean. The king of Munster was prohibited from enjoying the feast of Loch Lein from one Monday to another; from banqueting by night in the beginning of harvest before Geim at Leitreacha; from encamping for nine days upon the Siuir; and from holding a border meeting at Gabhran. The king of Connaught might not conclude a treaty respecting his ancient palace of Cruachan<a href="#note_33" id="noteref_33" name="noteref_33"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">33</span></span></a> after making peace on All-Hallows Day, nor go in a speckled garment on a grey speckled steed to the heath of Dal Chais, nor repair to an assembly of women at Seaghais, nor sit in autumn on the sepulchral mounds of the wife of Maine, nor contend in running with the rider of a grey one-eyed horse at Ath Gallta between two posts. The king of Ulster was forbidden to attend the horse fair at Rath Line among the youths of Dal Araidhe, to listen to the fluttering of the flocks of birds of Linn Saileach after sunset, to celebrate the feast of the bull of Daire-mic-Daire, to go into Magh Cobha in the month of March, and to drink of the water of Bo Neimhidh between two darknesses. If the kings of Ireland strictly observed these and many other customs, which were enjoined by immemorial usage, it was believed that they would never meet with mischance or misfortune, and would live for ninety years without experiencing the decay of old age; that no epidemic or mortality would occur during their reigns; and that the seasons would be favourable and the earth yield its fruit in abundance; whereas, if they set the ancient usages at naught, the country would be visited with plague, famine, and bad weather.<a href="#note_34" id="noteref_34" name="noteref_34"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">34</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The kings of Egypt were worshipped as gods,<a href="#note_35" id="noteref_35" name="noteref_35"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">35</span></span></a> and the routine of their daily life was regulated in every detail by precise and unvarying rules. <span class="tei tei-q">“The life of the kings of Egypt,”</span> says Diodorus, <span class="tei tei-q">“was not like that of other monarchs who are irresponsible and may do just what they choose; on the contrary, everything was fixed for them by law, not only their official duties, but even the details of their daily life.... The hours both of day and night were arranged at which the king had to do, not what he pleased, but what was prescribed for him.... For not only were the times appointed at which he should transact public business or sit in judgment; but the very hours for his walking and bathing and sleeping with his wife, and, in short, performing every act of life were all settled. Custom enjoined a simple diet; the only flesh he might eat was veal and goose, and he might only drink a prescribed quantity of wine.”</span><a href="#note_36" id="noteref_36" name="noteref_36"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">36</span></span></a> However, there is reason to think that these rules were observed, not by the ancient Pharaohs, but by the priestly kings who reigned at Thebes and in Ethiopia at the close of the twentieth dynasty.<a href="#note_37" id="noteref_37" name="noteref_37"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">37</span></span></a> Among the Karen-nis of Upper Burma a chief attains his position, not by hereditary right, but on account of his habit of abstaining from rice and liquor. The mother, too, of a candidate for the chieftainship must have eschewed these things and lived solely on yams and potatoes so long as she was with child. During that time she may not eat any meat nor drink water from a common well. And if her son is to be qualified for the office of chief he must continue to observe these habits.<a href="#note_38" id="noteref_38" name="noteref_38"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">38</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Of the taboos imposed on priests we may see a striking example in the rules of life prescribed for the Flamen Dialis at Rome, who has been interpreted as a living image of Jupiter, or a human embodiment of the sky-spirit.<a href="#note_39" id="noteref_39" name="noteref_39"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">39</span></span></a> They were such as the following:—The Flamen Dialis might not ride or even touch a horse, nor see an army under arms,<a href="#note_40" id="noteref_40" name="noteref_40"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">40</span></span></a> nor wear a ring which was not broken, nor have a knot on any part of his garments; no fire except a sacred fire might be taken out of his house; he might not touch wheaten flour or leavened bread; he might not touch or even name a goat, a dog,<a href="#note_41" id="noteref_41" name="noteref_41"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">41</span></span></a> raw meat, beans,<a href="#note_42" id="noteref_42" name="noteref_42"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">42</span></span></a> and ivy; he might not walk under a vine; the feet of his bed had to be daubed with mud; his hair could be cut only by a free man and with a bronze knife, and his hair and nails when cut had to be buried under a lucky tree; he might not touch a dead body nor enter a place where one was burned;<a href="#note_43" id="noteref_43" name="noteref_43"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">43</span></span></a> he might not see work being done on holy days; he might not be uncovered in the open air; if a man in bonds were taken into his house, the captive had to be unbound and the cords had to be drawn up through a hole in the roof and so let down into the street. His wife, the Flaminica, had to observe nearly the same rules, and others of her own besides. She might not ascend more than three steps of the kind of staircase called Greek; at a certain festival she might not comb her hair; the leather of her shoes might not be made from a beast that had died a natural death, but only from one that had been slain or sacrificed; if she heard thunder she was tabooed till she had offered an expiatory sacrifice.<a href="#note_44" id="noteref_44" name="noteref_44"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">44</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Among the Grebo people of Sierra Leone there is a pontiff who bears the title of Bodia and has been compared, on somewhat slender grounds, to the high priest of the Jews. He is appointed in accordance with the behest of an oracle. At an elaborate ceremony of installation he is anointed, a ring is put on his ankle as a badge of office, and the door-posts of his house are sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed goat. He has charge of the public talismans and idols, which he feeds with rice and oil every new moon; and he sacrifices on behalf of the town to the dead and to demons. Nominally his power is very great, but in practice it is very limited; for he dare not defy public opinion, and he is held responsible, even with his life, for any adversity that befalls the country. It is expected of him that he should cause the earth to bring forth abundantly, the people to be healthy, war to be driven far away, and witchcraft to be kept in abeyance. His life is trammelled by the observance of certain restrictions or taboos. Thus he may not sleep in any house but his own official residence, which is called the <span class="tei tei-q">“anointed house”</span> with reference to the ceremony of anointing him at inauguration. He may not drink water on the highway. He may not eat while a corpse is in the town, and he may not mourn for the dead. If he dies while in office, he must be buried at dead of night; few may hear of his burial, and none may mourn for him when his death is made public. Should he have fallen a victim to the poison ordeal by drinking a decoction of sassywood, as it is called, he must be buried under a running stream of water.<a href="#note_45" id="noteref_45" name="noteref_45"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">45</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Among the Todas of Southern India the holy milkman (<i>palol</i>), who acts as priest of the sacred dairy, is subject to a variety of irksome and burdensome restrictions during the whole time of his incumbency, which may last many years. Thus he must live at the sacred dairy and may never visit his home or any ordinary village. He must be celibate; if he is married he must leave his wife. On no account may any ordinary person touch the holy milkman or the holy dairy; such a touch would so defile his holiness that he would forfeit his office. It is only on two days a week, namely Mondays and Thursdays, that a mere layman may even approach the milkman; on other days if he has any business with him, he must stand at a distance (some say a quarter of a mile) and shout his message across the intervening space. Further, the holy milkman never cuts his hair or pares his nails so long as he holds office; he never crosses a river by a bridge, but wades through a ford and only certain fords; if a death occurs in his clan, he may not attend any of the funeral ceremonies, unless he first resigns his office and descends from the exalted rank of milkman to that of a mere common mortal. Indeed it appears that in old days he had to resign the seals, or rather the pails, of office whenever any member of his clan departed this life. However, these heavy restraints are laid in their entirety only on milkmen of the very highest class.<a href="#note_46" id="noteref_46" name="noteref_46"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">46</span></span></a> Among the Todas there are milkmen and milkmen; and some of them get off more lightly in consideration of their humbler station in life.<a href="#note_47" id="noteref_47" name="noteref_47"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">47</span></span></a> Still, apart from the dignity they enjoy, the lot even of these other milkmen is not altogether a happy one. Thus, for example, at a place called Kanodrs there is a dairy-temple of a conical form. The milkman who has charge of it must be celibate during the tenure of his office: he must sleep in the calves' house, a very flimsy structure with an open door and a fire-place that gives little heat: he may wear only one very scanty garment: he must take his meals sitting on the outer wall which surrounds the dairy: in eating he may not put his hand to his lips, but must throw the food into his mouth; and in drinking he may not put to his lips the leaf which serves as a cup, he must tilt his head back and pour the liquid into his mouth in a jet from above. With the exception of a single layman, who is allowed to bear the milkman company, but who is also bound to celibacy and has a bed rigged up for him in the calves' house, no other person is allowed to go near this very sacred dairy under any pretext whatever. No wonder that some years ago the dairy was unoccupied and the office of milkman stood vacant. <span class="tei tei-q">“At the present time,”</span> says Dr. Rivers, <span class="tei tei-q">“a dairyman is appointed about once a year and holds office for thirty or forty days only. So far as I could ascertain, the failure to occupy the dairy constantly is due to the very considerable hardships and restrictions which have to be endured by the holder of the office of dairyman, and the time is probably not far distant when this dairy, one of the most sacred among the Todas, will cease altogether to be used.”</span><a href="#note_48" id="noteref_48" name="noteref_48"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">48</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. Divorce of the Spiritual from the Temporal Power.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>The burdensome observances attached to the royal or priestly office produced their natural effect. Either men refused to accept the office, which hence tended to fall into abeyance; or accepting it, they sank under its weight into spiritless creatures, cloistered recluses, from whose nerveless fingers the reins of government slipped into the firmer grasp of men who were often content to wield the reality of sovereignty without its name. In some countries this rift in the supreme power deepened into a total and permanent separation of the spiritual and temporal powers, the old royal house retaining their purely religious functions, while the civil government passed into the hands of a younger and more vigorous race.</p>
					<p>To take examples. In a previous part of this work we saw that in Cambodia it is often necessary to force the kingships of Fire and Water upon the reluctant successors,<a href="#note_49" id="noteref_49" name="noteref_49"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">49</span></span></a> and that in Savage Island the monarchy actually came to an end because at last no one could be induced to accept the dangerous distinction.<a href="#note_50" id="noteref_50" name="noteref_50"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">50</span></span></a> In some parts of West Africa, when the king dies, a family council is secretly held to determine his successor. He on whom the choice falls is suddenly seized, bound, and thrown into the fetish-house, where he is kept in durance till he consents to accept the crown. Sometimes the heir finds means of evading the honour which it is sought to thrust upon him; a ferocious chief has been known to go about constantly armed, resolute to resist by force any attempt to set him on the throne.<a href="#note_51" id="noteref_51" name="noteref_51"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">51</span></span></a> The savage Timmes of Sierra Leone, who elect their king, reserve to themselves the right of beating him on the eve of his coronation; and they avail themselves of this constitutional privilege with such hearty goodwill that sometimes the unhappy monarch does not long survive his elevation to the throne. Hence when the leading chiefs have a spite at a man and wish to rid themselves of him, they elect him king.<a href="#note_52" id="noteref_52" name="noteref_52"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">52</span></span></a> Formerly, before a man was proclaimed king of Sierra Leone, it used to be the custom to load him with chains and thrash him. Then the fetters were knocked off, the kingly robe was placed on him, and he received in his hands the symbol of royal dignity, which was nothing but the axe of the executioner.<a href="#note_53" id="noteref_53" name="noteref_53"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">53</span></span></a> It is not therefore surprising to read that in Sierra Leone, where such customs have prevailed, <span class="tei tei-q">“except among the Mandingoes and Suzees, few kings are natives of the countries they govern. So different are their ideas from ours, that very few are solicitous of the honour, and competition is very seldom heard of.”</span><a href="#note_54" id="noteref_54" name="noteref_54"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">54</span></span></a> Another writer on Sierra Leone tells us that <span class="tei tei-q">“the honour of reigning, so much coveted in Europe, is very frequently rejected in Africa, on account of the expense attached to it, which sometimes greatly exceeds the revenues of the crown.”</span><a href="#note_55" id="noteref_55" name="noteref_55"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">55</span></span></a> A reluctance to accept the sovereignty in the Ethiopian kingdom of Gingiro was simulated, if not really felt, as we learn from the old Jesuit missionaries. <span class="tei tei-q">“They wrap up the dead king's body in costly garments, and killing a cow, put it into the hide; then all those who hope to succeed him, being his sons or others of the royal blood, flying from the honour they covet, abscond and hide themselves in the woods. This done, the electors, who are all great sorcerers, agree among themselves who shall be king, and go out to seek him, when entering the woods by means of their enchantments, they say, a large bird called <i>liber</i>, as big as an eagle, comes down with mighty cries over the place where he is hid, and they find him encompass'd by lyons, tygers, snakes, and other creatures gather'd about him by witchcraft. The elect, as fierce as those beasts, rushes out upon those who seek him, wounding and sometimes killing some of them, to prevent being seiz'd. They take all in good part, defending themselves the best they can, till they have seiz'd him. Thus they carry him away by force, he still struggling and seeming to refuse taking upon him the burthen of government, all which is mere cheat and hypocrisy.”</span><a href="#note_56" id="noteref_56" name="noteref_56"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">56</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The Mikados of Japan seem early to have resorted to the expedient of transferring the honours and burdens of supreme power to their infant children; and the rise of the Tycoons, long the temporal sovereigns of the country, is traced to the abdication of a certain Mikado in favour of his three-year-old son. The sovereignty having been wrested by a usurper from the infant prince, the cause of the Mikado was championed by Yoritomo, a man of spirit and conduct, who overthrew the usurper and restored to the Mikado the shadow, while he retained for himself the substance, of power. He bequeathed to his descendants the dignity he had won, and thus became the founder of the line of Tycoons. Down to the latter half of the sixteenth century the Tycoons were active and efficient rulers; but the same fate overtook them which had befallen the Mikados. Immeshed in the same inextricable web of custom and law, they degenerated into mere puppets, hardly stirring from their palaces and occupied in a perpetual round of empty ceremonies, while the real business of government was managed by the council of state.<a href="#note_57" id="noteref_57" name="noteref_57"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">57</span></span></a> In Tonquin the monarchy ran a similar course. Living like his predecessors in effeminacy and sloth, the king was driven from the throne by an ambitious adventurer named Mack, who from a fisherman had risen to be Grand Mandarin. But the king's brother Tring put down the usurper and restored the king, retaining, however, for himself and his descendants the dignity of general of all the forces. Thenceforward the kings or <i>dovas</i>, though invested with the title and pomp of sovereignty, ceased to govern. While they lived secluded in their palaces, all real political power was wielded by the hereditary generals or <i>chovas</i>.<a href="#note_58" id="noteref_58" name="noteref_58"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">58</span></span></a> The present king of Sikhim, <span class="tei tei-q">“like most of his predecessors in the kingship, is a mere puppet in the hands of his crafty priests, who have made a sort of priest-king of him. They encourage him by every means in their power to leave the government to them, whilst he devotes all his time to the degrading rites of devil-worship, and the ceaseless muttering of meaningless jargon, of which the Tibetan form of Buddhism chiefly consists. They declare that he is a saint by birth, that he is the direct descendant of the greatest king of Tibet, the canonised Srongtsan Gampo, who was a contemporary of Mahomed in the seventh century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> and who first introduced Buddhism to Tibet.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“This saintly lineage, which secures for the king's person popular homage amounting to worship, is probably, however, a mere invention of the priests to glorify their puppet-prince for their own sordid ends. Such devices are common in the East.”</span><a href="#note_59" id="noteref_59" name="noteref_59"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">59</span></span></a> The custom regularly observed by the Tahitian kings of abdicating on the birth of a son, who was immediately proclaimed sovereign and received his father's homage, may perhaps have originated, like the similar custom occasionally practised by the Mikados, in a wish to shift to other shoulders the irksome burden of royalty; for in Tahiti as elsewhere the sovereign was subjected to a system of vexatious restrictions.<a href="#note_60" id="noteref_60" name="noteref_60"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">60</span></span></a> In Mangaia, another Polynesian island, religious and civil authority were lodged in separate hands, spiritual functions being discharged by a line of hereditary kings, while the temporal government was entrusted from time to time to a victorious war-chief, whose investiture, however, had to be completed by the king. To the latter were assigned the best lands, and he received daily offerings of the choicest food.<a href="#note_61" id="noteref_61" name="noteref_61"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">61</span></span></a> The Mikado and Tycoon of Japan had their counterparts in the Roko Tui and Vunivalu of Fiji. The Roko Tui was the Reverend or Sacred King. The Vunivalu was the Root of War or War King. In one kingdom a certain Thakambau, who was the War King, kept all power in his own hands, but in a neighbouring kingdom the real ruler was the Sacred King.<a href="#note_62" id="noteref_62" name="noteref_62"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">62</span></span></a> Similarly in Tonga, besides the civil king or <i>How</i>, whose right to the throne was partly hereditary and partly derived from his warlike reputation and the number of his fighting men, there was a great divine chief called <i>Tooitonga</i> or <span class="tei tei-q">“Chief of Tonga,”</span> who ranked above the king and the other chiefs in virtue of his supposed descent from one of the chief gods. Once a year the first-fruits of the ground were offered to him at a solemn ceremony, and it was believed that if these offerings were not made the vengeance of the gods would fall in a signal manner on the people. Peculiar forms of speech, such as were applied to no one else, were used in speaking of him, and everything that he chanced to touch became sacred or tabooed. When he and the king met, the monarch had to sit down on the ground in token of respect until his holiness had passed by. Yet though he enjoyed the highest veneration by reason of his divine origin, this sacred personage possessed no political authority, and if he ventured to meddle with affairs of state it was at the risk of receiving a rebuff from the king, to whom the real power belonged, and who finally succeeded in ridding himself of his spiritual rival.<a href="#note_63" id="noteref_63" name="noteref_63"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">63</span></span></a> The king of the Getae regularly shared his power with a priest, whom his subjects called a god. This divine man led a solitary life in a cave on a holy mountain, seeing few people but the king and his attendants. His counsels added much to the king's influence with his subjects, who believed that he was thereby enabled to impart to them the commands and admonitions of the gods.<a href="#note_64" id="noteref_64" name="noteref_64"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">64</span></span></a> At Athens the kings degenerated into little more than sacred functionaries and it is said that the institution of the new office of Polemarch or War Lord was rendered necessary by their growing effeminacy.<a href="#note_65" id="noteref_65" name="noteref_65"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">65</span></span></a> American examples of the partition of authority between a king and a pope have already been cited from the early history of Mexico and Colombia.<a href="#note_66" id="noteref_66" name="noteref_66"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">66</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In some parts of western Africa two kings reign side by side, a fetish or religious king and a civil king, but the fetish king is really supreme. He controls the weather and so forth, and can put a stop to everything. When he lays his red staff on the ground, no one may pass that way. This division of power between a sacred and a secular ruler is to be met with wherever the true negro culture has been left unmolested, but where the negro form of society has been disturbed, as in Dahomey and Ashantee, there is a tendency to consolidate the two powers in a single king.<a href="#note_67" id="noteref_67" name="noteref_67"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">67</span></span></a> Thus, for example, there used to be a fetish king at New Calabar who ranked above the ordinary king in all native matters, whether religious or civil, and always walked in front of him on public occasions, attended by a slave who held an umbrella over his head. His opinion carried great weight.<a href="#note_68" id="noteref_68" name="noteref_68"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">68</span></span></a> The office and the causes which led to its extinction are thus described by a missionary who spent many years in Calabar: <span class="tei tei-q">“The worship of the people is now given especially to their various <i>idems</i>, one of which, called Ndem Efik, is a sort of tutelary deity of the country. An individual was appointed to take charge of this object of worship, who bore the name of King Calabar; and likely, in bypast times, possessed the power indicated by the title, being both king and priest. He had as a tribute the skins of all leopards killed, and should a slave take refuge in his shrine he belonged to Ndem Efik. The office, however, imposed certain restrictions on its occupant. He, for instance, could not partake of food in the presence of any one, and he was prohibited from engaging in traffic. On account of these and other disabilities, when the last holder of the office died, a poor old man of the Cobham family, no successor was found for him, and the priesthood has become extinct.”</span><a href="#note_69" id="noteref_69" name="noteref_69"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">69</span></span></a> One of the practical inconveniences of such an office is that the house of the fetish king enjoys the right of sanctuary, and so tends to become little better than a rookery of bad characters. Thus on the Grain Coast of West Africa the fetish king or Bodio, as he is called, <span class="tei tei-q">“exercises the functions of a high-priest, and is regarded as protector of the whole nation. He lives in a house provided for him by the people, and takes care of the national fetiches. He enjoys some immunities in virtue of his office, but is subject to certain restrictions which more than counterbalance his privileges. His house is a sanctum to which culprits may betake themselves without the danger of being removed by any one except by the Bodio himself.”</span><a href="#note_70" id="noteref_70" name="noteref_70"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">70</span></span></a> One of these Bodios resigned office because of the sort of people who quartered themselves on him, the cost of feeding them, and the squabbles they had among themselves. He led a cat-and-dog life with them for three years. Then there came a man with homicidal mania varied by epileptic fits; and soon afterwards the spiritual shepherd retired into private life, but not before he had lost an ear and sustained other bodily injury in a personal conflict with this very black sheep.<a href="#note_71" id="noteref_71" name="noteref_71"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">71</span></span></a></p>
					<p>At Porto Novo there used to be, in addition to the ordinary monarch, a King of the Night, who reigned during the hours of darkness from sunset to sunrise. He might not shew himself in the street after the sun was up. His duty was to patrol the streets with his satellites and to arrest all whom he found abroad after a certain hour. Each band of his catchpoles was led by a man who went about concealed from head to foot under a conical casing of straw and blew blasts on a shell which caused every one that heard it to shudder. The King of the Night never met the ordinary king except on the first and last days of their respective reign; for each of them invested the other with office and paid him the last honours at death.<a href="#note_72" id="noteref_72" name="noteref_72"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">72</span></span></a> With this King of the Night at Porto Novo we may compare a certain king of Hawaii who was so very sacred that no man might see him, even accidentally, by day under pain of death; he only shewed himself by night.<a href="#note_73" id="noteref_73" name="noteref_73"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">73</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In some parts of the East Indian island of Timor we meet with a partition of power like that which is represented by the civil king and the fetish king of western Africa. Some of the Timorese tribes recognise two rajahs, the ordinary or civil rajah, who governs the people, and the fetish or taboo rajah (<i>radja pomali</i>), who is charged with the control of everything that concerns the earth and its products. This latter ruler has the right of declaring anything taboo; his permission must be obtained before new land may be brought under cultivation, and he must perform certain necessary ceremonies when the work is being carried out. If drought or blight threatens the crops, his help is invoked to save them. Though he ranks below the civil rajah, he exercises a momentous influence on the course of events, for his secular colleague is bound to consult him in all important matters. In some of the neighbouring islands, such as Rotti and eastern Flores, a spiritual ruler of the same sort is recognised under various native names, which all mean <span class="tei tei-q">“lord of the ground.”</span><a href="#note_74" id="noteref_74" name="noteref_74"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">74</span></span></a> Similarly in the Mekeo district of British New Guinea there is a double chieftainship. The people are divided into two groups according to families, and each of the groups has its chief. One of the two is the war chief, the other is the taboo (<i>afu</i>) chief. The office of the latter is hereditary; his duty is to impose a taboo on any of the crops, such as the coco-nuts and areca nuts, whenever he thinks it desirable to prohibit their use. In his office we may perhaps detect the beginning of a priestly dynasty, but as yet his functions appear to be more magical than religious, being concerned with the control of the harvests rather than with the propitiation of higher powers. The members of another family are bound to see to it that the taboo imposed by the chief is strictly observed. For this purpose some fourteen or fifteen men of the family form a sort of constabulary. Every evening they go round the village armed with clubs and disguised with masks or leaves. All the time they are in office they are forbidden to live with their wives and even to look at a woman. Hence women may not quit their houses while the men are going their rounds. Further, the constables on duty are prohibited from chewing betel nut and drinking coco-nut water, lest the areca and coco-nuts should not grow. When there is a good show of nuts, the taboo chief proclaims that on a certain day the restriction will come to an end.<a href="#note_75" id="noteref_75" name="noteref_75"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">75</span></span></a> In Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands, the kingship is elective within the limits of the blood royal, which runs in the female line, so that the sovereignty passes backwards and forwards between families which we, reckoning descent in the male line, should regard as distinct. The chosen monarch must be in possession of certain secrets. He must know the places where the sacred stones are kept, on which he has to seat himself. He must understand the holy words and prayers of the liturgy, and after his election he must recite them at the place of the sacred stones. But he enjoys only the honours of his office; the real powers of government are in the hands of his prime-minister or vizier.<a href="#note_76" id="noteref_76" name="noteref_76"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">76</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
