<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter V. The Corn-Mother and the Corn-Maiden in Northern Europe.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>It has been argued by W. Mannhardt that the first part of Demeter's name is derived from an alleged Cretan word <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">deai</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“barley,”</span> and that accordingly Demeter means neither more nor less than <span class="tei tei-q">“Barley-mother”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“Corn-mother”</span>;<a href="#note_417" id="noteref_417" name="noteref_417"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">417</span></span></a> for the root of the word seems to have been applied to different kinds of grain by different branches of the Aryans.<a href="#note_418" id="noteref_418" name="noteref_418"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">418</span></span></a> As Crete appears to have been one of the most ancient seats of the worship of Demeter,<a href="#note_419" id="noteref_419" name="noteref_419"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">419</span></span></a> it would not be surprising if her name were of Cretan origin. But the etymology is open to serious objections,<a href="#note_420" id="noteref_420" name="noteref_420"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">420</span></span></a> and it is safer therefore to lay no stress on it. Be that as it may, we have found independent reasons for identifying Demeter as the Corn-mother, and of the two species of corn associated with her in Greek religion, namely barley and wheat, the barley has perhaps the better claim to be her original element; for not only would it seem to have been the staple food of the Greeks in the Homeric age, but there are grounds for believing that it is one of the oldest, if not the very oldest, cereal cultivated by the Aryan race. Certainly the use of barley in the religious ritual of the ancient Hindoos as well as of the ancient Greeks furnishes a strong argument in favour of the great antiquity of its cultivation, which is known to have been practised by the lake-dwellers of the Stone Age in Europe.<a href="#note_421" id="noteref_421" name="noteref_421"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">421</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Analogies to the Corn-mother or Barley-mother of ancient Greece have been collected in great abundance by W. Mannhardt from the folk-lore of modern Europe. The following may serve as specimens.</p>
				<p>In Germany the corn is very commonly personified under the name of the Corn-mother. Thus in spring, when the corn waves in the wind, the peasants say, <span class="tei tei-q">“There comes the Corn-mother,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“The Corn-mother is running over the field,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“The Corn-mother is going through the corn.”</span><a href="#note_422" id="noteref_422" name="noteref_422"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">422</span></span></a> When children wish to go into the fields to pull the blue corn-flowers or the red poppies, they are told not to do so, because the Corn-mother is sitting in the corn and will catch them.<a href="#note_423" id="noteref_423" name="noteref_423"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">423</span></span></a> Or again she is called, according to the crop, the Rye-mother or the Pea-mother, and children are warned against straying in the rye or among the peas by threats of the Rye-mother or the Pea-mother. In Norway also the Pea-mother is said to sit among the peas.<a href="#note_424" id="noteref_424" name="noteref_424"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">424</span></span></a> Similar expressions are current among the Slavs. The Poles and Czechs warn children against the Corn-mother who sits in the corn. Or they call her the old Corn-woman, and say that she sits in the corn and strangles the children who tread it down.<a href="#note_425" id="noteref_425" name="noteref_425"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">425</span></span></a> The Lithuanians say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Old Rye-woman sits in the corn.”</span><a href="#note_426" id="noteref_426" name="noteref_426"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">426</span></span></a> Again the Corn-mother is believed to make the crop grow. Thus in the neighbourhood of Magdeburg it is sometimes said, <span class="tei tei-q">“It will be a good year for flax; the Flax-mother has been seen.”</span> At Dinkelsbühl, in Bavaria, down to the latter part of the nineteenth century, people believed that when the crops on a particular farm compared unfavourably with those of the neighbourhood, the reason was that the Corn-mother had punished the farmer for his sins.<a href="#note_427" id="noteref_427" name="noteref_427"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">427</span></span></a> In a village of Styria it is said that the Corn-mother, in the shape of a female puppet made out of the last sheaf of corn and dressed in white, may be seen at midnight in the corn-fields, which she fertilises by passing through them; but if she is angry with a farmer, she withers up all his corn.<a href="#note_428" id="noteref_428" name="noteref_428"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">428</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Further, the Corn-mother plays an important part in harvest customs. She is believed to be present in the handful of corn which is left standing last on the field; and with the cutting of this last handful she is caught, or driven away, or killed. In the first of these cases, the last sheaf is carried joyfully home and honoured as a divine being. It is placed in the barn, and at threshing the corn-spirit appears again.<a href="#note_429" id="noteref_429" name="noteref_429"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">429</span></span></a> In the Hanoverian district of Hadeln the reapers stand round the last sheaf and beat it with sticks in order to drive the Corn-mother out of it. They call to each other, <span class="tei tei-q">“There she is! hit her! Take care she doesn't catch you!”</span> The beating goes on till the grain is completely threshed out; then the Corn-mother is believed to be driven away.<a href="#note_430" id="noteref_430" name="noteref_430"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">430</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Danzig the person who cuts the last ears of corn makes them into a doll, which is called the Corn-mother or the Old Woman and is brought home on the last waggon.<a href="#note_431" id="noteref_431" name="noteref_431"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">431</span></span></a> In some parts of Holstein the last sheaf is dressed in woman's clothes and called the Corn-mother. It is carried home on the last waggon, and then thoroughly drenched with water. The drenching with water is doubtless a rain-charm.<a href="#note_432" id="noteref_432" name="noteref_432"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">432</span></span></a> In the district of Bruck in Styria the last sheaf, called the Corn-mother, is made up into the shape of a woman by the oldest married woman in the village, of an age from fifty to fifty-five years. The finest ears are plucked out of it and made into a wreath, which, twined with flowers, is carried on her head by the prettiest girl of the village to the farmer or squire, while the Corn-mother is laid down in the barn to keep off the mice.<a href="#note_433" id="noteref_433" name="noteref_433"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">433</span></span></a> In other villages of the same district the Corn-mother, at the close of harvest, is carried by two lads at the top of a pole. They march behind the girl who wears the wreath to the squire's house, and while he receives the wreath and hangs it up in the hall, the Corn-mother is placed on the top of a pile of wood, where she is the centre of the harvest supper and dance. Afterwards she is hung up in the barn and remains there till the threshing is over. The man who gives the last stroke at threshing is called the son of the Corn-mother; he is tied up in the Corn-mother, beaten, and carried through the village. The wreath is dedicated in church on the following Sunday; and on Easter Eve the grain is rubbed out of it by a seven-years-old girl and scattered amongst the young corn. At Christmas the straw of the wreath is placed in the manger to make the cattle thrive.<a href="#note_434" id="noteref_434" name="noteref_434"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">434</span></span></a> Here the fertilising power of the Corn-mother is plainly brought out by scattering the seed taken from her body (for the wreath is made out of the Corn-mother) among the new corn; and her influence over animal life is indicated by placing the straw in the manger. At Westerhüsen, in Saxony, the last corn cut is made in the shape of a woman decked with ribbons and cloth. It is fastened to a pole and brought home on the last waggon. One of the people in the waggon keeps waving the pole, so that the figure moves as if alive. It is placed on the threshing-floor, and stays there till the threshing is done.<a href="#note_435" id="noteref_435" name="noteref_435"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">435</span></span></a> Amongst the Slavs also the last sheaf is known as the Rye-mother, the Wheat-mother, the Oats-mother, the Barley-mother, and so on, according to the crop. In the district of Tarnow, Galicia, the wreath made out of the last stalks is called the Wheat-mother, Rye-mother, or Pea-mother. It is placed on a girl's head and kept till spring, when some of the grain is mixed with the seed-corn.<a href="#note_436" id="noteref_436" name="noteref_436"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">436</span></span></a> Here again the fertilising power of the Corn-mother is indicated. In France, also, in the neighbourhood of Auxerre, the last sheaf goes by the name of the Mother of the Wheat, Mother of the Barley, Mother of the Rye, or Mother of the Oats. They leave it standing in the field till the last waggon is about to wend homewards. Then they make a puppet out of it, dress it with clothes belonging to the farmer, and adorn it with a crown and a blue or white scarf. A branch of a tree is stuck in the breast of the puppet, which is now called the Ceres. At the dance in the evening the Ceres is set in the middle of the floor, and the reaper who reaped fastest dances round it with the prettiest girl for his partner. After the dance a pyre is made. All the girls, each wearing a wreath, strip the puppet, pull it to pieces, and place it on the pyre, along with the flowers with which it was adorned. Then the girl who was the first to finish reaping sets fire to the pile, and all pray that Ceres may give a fruitful year. Here, as Mannhardt observes, the old custom has remained intact, though the name Ceres is a bit of schoolmaster's learning.<a href="#note_437" id="noteref_437" name="noteref_437"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">437</span></span></a> In Upper Brittany the last sheaf is always made into human shape; but if the farmer is a married man, it is made double and consists of a little corn-puppet placed inside of a large one. This is called the Mother-sheaf. It is delivered to the farmer's wife, who unties it and gives drink-money in return.<a href="#note_438" id="noteref_438" name="noteref_438"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">438</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Sometimes the last sheaf is called, not the Corn-mother, but the Harvest-mother or the Great Mother. In the province of Osnabrück, Hanover, it is called the Harvest-mother; it is made up in female form, and then the reapers dance about with it. In some parts of Westphalia the last sheaf at the rye-harvest is made especially heavy by fastening stones in it. They bring it home on the last waggon and call it the Great Mother, though they do not fashion it into any special shape. In the district of Erfurt a very heavy sheaf, not necessarily the last, is called the Great Mother, and is carried on the last waggon to the barn, where all hands lift it down amid a fire of jokes.<a href="#note_439" id="noteref_439" name="noteref_439"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">439</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Sometimes again the last sheaf is called the Grandmother, and is adorned with flowers, ribbons, and a woman's apron. In East Prussia, at the rye or wheat harvest, the reapers call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <span class="tei tei-q">“You are getting the Old Grandmother.”</span> In the neighbourhood of Magdeburg the men and women servants strive who shall get the last sheaf, called the Grandmother. Whoever gets it will be married in the next year, but his or her spouse will be old; if a girl gets it, she will marry a widower; if a man gets it, he will marry an old crone. In Silesia the Grandmother—a huge bundle made up of three or four sheaves by the person who tied the last sheaf—was formerly fashioned into a rude likeness of the human form.<a href="#note_440" id="noteref_440" name="noteref_440"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">440</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Belfast the last sheaf sometimes goes by the name of the Granny. It is not cut in the usual way, but all the reapers throw their sickles at it and try to bring it down. It is plaited and kept till the (next?) autumn. Whoever gets it will marry in the course of the year.<a href="#note_441" id="noteref_441" name="noteref_441"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">441</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Oftener the last sheaf is called the Old Woman or the Old Man. In Germany it is frequently shaped and dressed as a woman, and the person who cuts it or binds it is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“get the Old Woman.”</span><a href="#note_442" id="noteref_442" name="noteref_442"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">442</span></span></a> At Altisheim, in Swabia, when all the corn of a farm has been cut except a single strip, all the reapers stand in a row before the strip; each cuts his share rapidly, and he who gives the last cut <span class="tei tei-q">“has the Old Woman.”</span><a href="#note_443" id="noteref_443" name="noteref_443"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">443</span></span></a> When the sheaves are being set up in heaps, the person who gets hold of the Old Woman, which is the largest and thickest of all the sheaves, is jeered at by the rest, who call out to him, <span class="tei tei-q">“He has the Old Woman and must keep her.”</span><a href="#note_444" id="noteref_444" name="noteref_444"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">444</span></span></a> The woman who binds the last sheaf is sometimes herself called the Old Woman, and it is said that she will be married in the next year.<a href="#note_445" id="noteref_445" name="noteref_445"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">445</span></span></a> In Neusaass, West Prussia, both the last sheaf—which is dressed up in jacket, hat, and ribbons—and the woman who binds it are called the Old Woman. Together they are brought home on the last waggon and are drenched with water.<a href="#note_446" id="noteref_446" name="noteref_446"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">446</span></span></a> In various parts of North Germany the last sheaf at harvest is made up into a human effigy and called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man”</span>; and the woman who bound it is said <span class="tei tei-q">“to have the Old Man.”</span><a href="#note_447" id="noteref_447" name="noteref_447"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">447</span></span></a> At Hornkampe, near Tiegenhof (West Prussia), when a man or woman lags behind the rest in binding the corn, the other reapers dress up the last sheaf in the form of a man or woman, and this figure goes by the laggard's name, as <span class="tei tei-q">“the old Michael,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the idle Trine.”</span> It is brought home on the last waggon, and, as it nears the house, the bystanders call out to the laggard, <span class="tei tei-q">“You have got the Old Woman and must keep her.”</span><a href="#note_448" id="noteref_448" name="noteref_448"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">448</span></span></a> In Brandenburg the young folks on the harvest-field race towards a sheaf and jump over it. The last to jump over it has to carry a straw puppet, adorned with ribbons, to the farmer and deliver it to him while he recites some verses. Of the person who thus carries the puppet it is said that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has the Old Man.”</span> Probably the puppet is or used to be made out of the last corn cut.<a href="#note_449" id="noteref_449" name="noteref_449"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">449</span></span></a> In many districts of Saxony the last sheaf used to be adorned with ribbons and set upright so as to look like a man. It was then known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man,”</span> and the young women brought it back in procession to the farm, singing as they went, <span class="tei tei-q">“Now we are bringing the Old Man.”</span><a href="#note_450" id="noteref_450" name="noteref_450"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">450</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In West Prussia, when the last rye is being raked together, the women and girls hurry with the work, for none of them likes to be the last and to get <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man,”</span> that is, a puppet made out of the last sheaf, which must be carried before the other reapers by the person who was the last to finish.<a href="#note_451" id="noteref_451" name="noteref_451"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">451</span></span></a> In Silesia the last sheaf is called the Old Woman or the Old Man and is the theme of many jests; it is made unusually large and is sometimes weighted with a stone. At Girlachsdorf, near Reichenbach, when this heavy sheaf is lifted into the waggon, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“That is the Old Man whom we sought for so long.”</span><a href="#note_452" id="noteref_452" name="noteref_452"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">452</span></span></a> Among the Germans of West Bohemia the man who cuts the last corn is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“have the Old Man.”</span> In former times it used to be customary to put a wreath on his head and to play all kinds of pranks with him, and at the harvest supper he was given the largest portion.<a href="#note_453" id="noteref_453" name="noteref_453"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">453</span></span></a> At Wolletz in Westphalia the last sheaf at harvest is called the Old Man, and being made up into the likeness of a man and decorated with flowers it is presented to the farmer, who in return prepares a feast for the reapers. About Unna, in Westphalia, the last sheaf at harvest is made unusually large, and stones are inserted to increase its weight. It is called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">de greaute meaur</span></span> (the Grey Mother?), and when it is brought home on the waggon water is thrown on the harvesters who accompany it.<a href="#note_454" id="noteref_454" name="noteref_454"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">454</span></span></a> Among the Wends the man or woman who binds the last sheaf at wheat harvest is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“have the Old Man.”</span> A puppet is made out of the wheaten straw and ears in the likeness of a man and decked with flowers. The person who bound the last sheaf must carry the Old Man home, while the rest laugh and jeer at him. The puppet is hung up in the farmhouse and remains till a new Old Man is made at the next harvest.<a href="#note_455" id="noteref_455" name="noteref_455"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">455</span></span></a> At the close of the harvest the Arabs of Moab bury the last sheaf in a grave in the cornfield, saying as they do so, <span class="tei tei-q">“We are burying the Old Man,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“The Old Man is dead.”</span><a href="#note_456" id="noteref_456" name="noteref_456"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">456</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In some of these customs, as Mannhardt has remarked, the person who is called by the same name as the last sheaf and sits beside it on the last waggon is obviously identified with it; he or she represents the corn-spirit which has been caught in the last sheaf; in other words, the corn-spirit is represented in duplicate, by a human being and by a sheaf.<a href="#note_457" id="noteref_457" name="noteref_457"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">457</span></span></a> The identification of the person with the sheaf is made still clearer by the custom of wrapping up in the last sheaf the person who cuts or binds it. Thus at Hermsdorf in Silesia it used to be the regular practice to tie up in the last sheaf the woman who had bound it.<a href="#note_458" id="noteref_458" name="noteref_458"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">458</span></span></a> At Weiden, in Bavaria, it is the cutter, not the binder, of the last sheaf who is tied up in it.<a href="#note_459" id="noteref_459" name="noteref_459"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">459</span></span></a> Here the person wrapt up in the corn represents the corn-spirit, exactly as a person wrapt in branches or leaves represents the tree-spirit.<a href="#note_460" id="noteref_460" name="noteref_460"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">460</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The last sheaf, designated as the Old Woman, is often distinguished from the other sheaves by its size and weight. Thus in some villages of West Prussia the Old Woman is made twice as long and thick as a common sheaf, and a stone is fastened in the middle of it. Sometimes it is made so heavy that a man can barely lift it.<a href="#note_461" id="noteref_461" name="noteref_461"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">461</span></span></a> At Alt-Pillau, in Samland, eight or nine sheaves are often tied together to make the Old Woman, and the man who sets it up grumbles at its weight.<a href="#note_462" id="noteref_462" name="noteref_462"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">462</span></span></a> At Itzgrund, in Saxe-Coburg, the last sheaf, called the Old Woman, is made large with the express intention of thereby securing a good crop next year.<a href="#note_463" id="noteref_463" name="noteref_463"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">463</span></span></a> Thus the custom of making the last sheaf unusually large or heavy is a charm, working by sympathetic magic, to ensure a large and heavy crop at the following harvest. In Denmark also the last sheaf is made larger than the others, and is called the Old Rye-woman or the Old Barley-woman. No one likes to bind it, because whoever does so will be sure, they think, to marry an old man or an old woman. Sometimes the last wheat-sheaf, called the Old Wheat-woman, is made up in human shape, with head, arms, and legs, and being dressed in clothes is carried home on the last waggon, while the harvesters sit beside it drinking and huzzaing.<a href="#note_464" id="noteref_464" name="noteref_464"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">464</span></span></a> Of the person who binds the last sheaf it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">“She or he is the Old Rye-woman.”</span><a href="#note_465" id="noteref_465" name="noteref_465"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">465</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Scotland, when the last corn was cut after Hallowmas, the female figure made out of it was sometimes called the Carlin or Carline, that is, the Old Woman. But if cut before Hallowmas, it was called the Maiden; if cut after sunset, it was called the Witch, being supposed to bring bad luck.<a href="#note_466" id="noteref_466" name="noteref_466"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">466</span></span></a> Among the Highlanders of Scotland the last corn cut at harvest is known either as the Old Wife (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cailleach</span></span>) or as the Maiden; on the whole the former name seems to prevail in the western and the latter in the central and eastern districts. Of the Maiden we shall speak presently; here we are dealing with the Old Wife. The following general account of the custom is given by a careful and well-informed enquirer, the Rev. J. G. Campbell, minister of the remote Hebridean island of Tiree: <span class="tei tei-q">“The Harvest Old Wife (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">a Chailleach</span></span>).—In harvest, there was a struggle to escape from being the last done with the shearing,<a href="#note_467" id="noteref_467" name="noteref_467"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">467</span></span></a> and when tillage in common existed, instances were known of a ridge being left unshorn (no person would claim it) because of it being behind the rest. The fear entertained was that of having the <span class="tei tei-q">‘famine of the farm’</span> (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">gort a bhaile</span></span>), in the shape of an imaginary old woman (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">cailleach</span></span>), to feed till next harvest. Much emulation and amusement arose from the fear of this old woman.... The first done made a doll of some blades of corn, which was called the <span class="tei tei-q">‘old wife,’</span> and sent it to his nearest neighbour. He in turn, when ready, passed it to another still less expeditious, and the person it last remained with had <span class="tei tei-q">‘the old woman’</span> to keep for that year.”</span><a href="#note_468" id="noteref_468" name="noteref_468"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">468</span></span></a></p>
				<p>To illustrate the custom by examples, in Bernera, on the west of Lewis, the harvest rejoicing goes by the name of the Old Wife (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cailleach</span></span>) from the last sheaf cut, whether in a township, farm, or croft. Where there are a number of crofts beside each other, there is always great rivalry as to who shall first finish reaping, and so have the Old Wife before his neighbours. Some people even go out on a clear night to reap their fields after their neighbours have retired to rest, in order that they may have the Old Wife first. More neighbourly habits, however, usually prevail, and as each finishes his own fields he goes to the help of another, till the whole crop is cut. The reaping is still done with the sickle. When the corn has been cut on all the crofts, the last sheaf is dressed up to look as like an old woman as possible. She wears a white cap, a dress, an apron, and a little shawl over the shoulders fastened with a sprig of heather. The apron is tucked up to form a pocket, which is stuffed with bread and cheese. A sickle, stuck in the string of the apron at the back, completes her equipment. This costume and outfit mean that the Old Wife is ready to bear a hand in the work of harvesting. At the feast which follows, the Old Wife is placed at the head of the table, and as the whisky goes round each of the company drinks to her, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Here's to the one that has helped us with the harvest.”</span> When the table has been cleared away and dancing begins, one of the lads leads out the Old Wife and dances with her; and if the night is fine the party will sometimes go out and march in a body to a considerable distance, singing harvest-songs, while one of them carries the Old Wife on his back. When the Harvest-Home is over, the Old Wife is shorn of her gear and used for ordinary purposes.<a href="#note_469" id="noteref_469" name="noteref_469"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">469</span></span></a> In the island of Islay the last corn cut also goes by the name of the Old Wife (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cailleach</span></span>), and when she has done her duty at harvest she is hung up on the wall and stays there till the time comes to plough the fields for the next year's crop. Then she is taken down, and on the first day when the men go to plough she is divided among them by the mistress of the house. They take her in their pockets and give her to the horses to eat when they reach the field. This is supposed to secure good luck for the next harvest, and is understood to be the proper end of the Old Wife.<a href="#note_470" id="noteref_470" name="noteref_470"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">470</span></span></a> In Kintyre also the name of the Old Wife is given to the last corn cut.<a href="#note_471" id="noteref_471" name="noteref_471"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">471</span></span></a> On the shores of the beautiful Loch Awe, a long sheet of water, winding among soft green hills, above which the giant Ben Cruachan towers bold and rugged on the north, the harvest custom is somewhat different. The name of the Old Wife (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cailleach</span></span>) is here bestowed, not on the last corn cut, but on the reaper who is the last to finish. He bears it as a term of reproach, and is not privileged to reap the last ears left standing. On the contrary, these are cut by the reaper who was the first to finish his <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">spagh</span></span> or strip (literally <span class="tei tei-q">“claw”</span>), and out of them is fashioned the Maiden, which is afterwards hung up, according to one statement, <span class="tei tei-q">“for the purpose of preventing the death of horses in spring.”</span><a href="#note_472" id="noteref_472" name="noteref_472"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">472</span></span></a> In the north-east of Scotland <span class="tei tei-q">“the one who took the last of the grain from the field to the stackyard was called the <span class="tei tei-q">‘winter.’</span> Each one did what could be done to avoid being the last on the field, and when there were several on the field there was a race to get off. The unfortunate <span class="tei tei-q">‘winter’</span> was the subject of a good deal of teasing, and was dressed up in all the old clothes that could be gathered about the farm, and placed on the <span class="tei tei-q">‘bink’</span> to eat his supper.”</span><a href="#note_473" id="noteref_473" name="noteref_473"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">473</span></span></a> So in Caithness the person who cuts the last sheaf is called Winter and retains the name till the next harvest.<a href="#note_474" id="noteref_474" name="noteref_474"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">474</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Usages of the same sort are reported from Wales. Thus in North Pembrokeshire a tuft of the last corn cut, from six to twelve inches long, is plaited and goes by the name of the Hag (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrach</span></span>); and quaint old customs used to be practised with it within the memory of many persons still alive. Great was the excitement among the reapers when the last patch of standing corn was reached. All in turn threw their sickles at it, and the one who succeeded in cutting it received a jug of home-brewed ale. The Hag (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrach</span></span>) was then hurriedly made and taken to a neighbouring farm, where the reapers were still busy at their work. This was generally done by the ploughman; but he had to be very careful not to be observed by his neighbours, for if they saw him coming and had the least suspicion of his errand they would soon make him retrace his steps. Creeping stealthily up behind a fence he waited till the foreman of his neighbour's reapers was just opposite him and within easy reach. Then he suddenly threw the Hag over the fence and, if possible, upon the foreman's sickle, crying out</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Boreu y codais i,</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Hwyr y dilynais i,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Ar ei gwar hi.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>On that he took to his heels and made off as fast as he could run, and he was a lucky man if he escaped without being caught or cut by the flying sickles which the infuriated reapers hurled after him. In other cases the Hag was brought home to the farmhouse by one of the reapers. He did his best to bring it home dry and without being observed; but he was apt to be roughly handled by the people of the house, if they suspected his errand. Sometimes they stripped him of most of his clothes, sometimes they would drench him with water which had been carefully stored in buckets and pans for the purpose. If, however, he succeeded in bringing the Hag in dry and unobserved, the master of the house had to pay him a small fine; or sometimes a jug of beer <span class="tei tei-q">“from the cask next to the wall,”</span> which seems to have commonly held the best beer, would be demanded by the bearer. The Hag was then carefully hung on a nail in the hall or elsewhere and kept there all the year. The custom of bringing in the Hag (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrach</span></span>) into the house and hanging it up still exists in some farms of North Pembrokeshire, but the ancient ceremonies which have just been described are now discontinued.<a href="#note_475" id="noteref_475" name="noteref_475"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">475</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Similar customs at harvest were observed in South Pembrokeshire within living memory. In that part of the country there used to be a competition between neighbouring farms to see which would finish reaping first. The foreman of the reapers planned so as to finish the reaping in a corner of the field out of sight of the people on the next farm. There, with the last handful of corn cut, he would make two Old Women or Hags (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrachs</span></span>). One of them he would send by a lad or other messenger to be laid secretly in the field where the neighbours were still at work cutting their corn. The messenger would disguise himself to look like a stranger, and jumping the fence and creeping through the corn he would lay the Hag (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrach</span></span>) in a place where the reapers in reaping would be sure to find it. Having done so he fled for dear life, for were the reapers to catch him they would shut him up in a dark room and not let him out till he had cleaned all the muddy boots, shoes, and clogs in the house. The second Hag (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrach</span></span>) was sent or taken by the foreman of the reapers to his master's farmhouse. Generally he tried to pop into the house unseen and lay the Hag on the kitchen table; but if the people of the farm caught him before he laid it down, they used to drench him with water. If a foreman succeeded in getting both the Hags (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wrachs</span></span>) laid safe in their proper quarters, one at home, the other on a neighbour's farm, without interruption, it was deemed a great honour.<a href="#note_476" id="noteref_476" name="noteref_476"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">476</span></span></a> In County Antrim, down to some years ago, when the sickle was finally expelled by the reaping machine, the few stalks of corn left standing last on the field were plaited together; then the reapers, blindfolded, threw their sickles at the plaited corn, and whoever happened to cut it through took it home with him and put it over his door. This bunch of corn was called the Carley<a href="#note_477" id="noteref_477" name="noteref_477"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">477</span></span></a>—probably the same word as Carlin.</p>
				<p>Similar customs are observed by Slavonic peoples. Thus in Poland the last sheaf is commonly called the Baba, that is, the Old Woman. <span class="tei tei-q">“In the last sheaf,”</span> it is said, <span class="tei tei-q">“sits the Baba.”</span> The sheaf itself is also called the Baba, and is sometimes composed of twelve smaller sheaves lashed together.<a href="#note_478" id="noteref_478" name="noteref_478"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">478</span></span></a> In some parts of Bohemia the Baba, made out of the last sheaf, has the figure of a woman with a great straw hat. It is carried home on the last harvest-waggon and delivered, along with a garland, to the farmer by two girls. In binding the sheaves the women strive not to be last, for she who binds the last sheaf will have a child next year.<a href="#note_479" id="noteref_479" name="noteref_479"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">479</span></span></a> The last sheaf is tied up with others into a large bundle, and a green branch is stuck on the top of it.<a href="#note_480" id="noteref_480" name="noteref_480"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">480</span></span></a> Sometimes the harvesters call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <span class="tei tei-q">“She has the Baba,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“She is the Baba.”</span> She has then to make a puppet, sometimes in female, sometimes in male form, out of the corn; the puppet is occasionally dressed with clothes, often with flowers and ribbons only. The cutter of the last stalks, as well as the binder of the last sheaf, was also called Baba; and a doll, called the Harvest-woman, was made out of the last sheaf and adorned with ribbons. The oldest reaper had to dance, first with this doll, and then with the farmer's wife.<a href="#note_481" id="noteref_481" name="noteref_481"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">481</span></span></a> In the district of Cracow, when a man binds the last sheaf, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Grandfather is sitting in it”</span>; when a woman binds it, they say, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Baba is sitting in it,”</span> and the woman herself is wrapt up in the sheaf, so that only her head projects out of it. Thus encased in the sheaf, she is carried on the last harvest-waggon to the house, where she is drenched with water by the whole family. She remains in the sheaf till the dance is over, and for a year she retains the name of Baba.<a href="#note_482" id="noteref_482" name="noteref_482"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">482</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Lithuania the name for the last sheaf is Boba (Old Woman), answering to the Polish name Baba. The Boba is said to sit in the corn which is left standing last.<a href="#note_483" id="noteref_483" name="noteref_483"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">483</span></span></a> The person who binds the last sheaf or digs the last potato is the subject of much banter, and receives and long retains the name of the Old Rye-woman or the Old Potato-woman.<a href="#note_484" id="noteref_484" name="noteref_484"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">484</span></span></a> The last sheaf—the Boba—is made into the form of a woman, carried solemnly through the village on the last harvest-waggon, and drenched with water at the farmer's house; then every one dances with it.<a href="#note_485" id="noteref_485" name="noteref_485"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">485</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Russia also the last sheaf is often shaped and dressed as a woman, and carried with dance and song to the farmhouse. Out of the last sheaf the Bulgarians make a doll which they call the Corn-queen or Corn-mother; it is dressed in a woman's shirt, carried round the village, and then thrown into the river in order to secure plenty of rain and dew for the next year's crop. Or it is burned and the ashes strewn on the fields, doubtless to fertilise them.<a href="#note_486" id="noteref_486" name="noteref_486"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">486</span></span></a> The name Queen, as applied to the last sheaf, has its analogies in central and northern Europe. Thus, in the Salzburg district of Austria, at the end of the harvest a great procession takes place, in which a Queen of the Corn-ears (<i xml:lang="de">Ährenkönigin</i>) is drawn along in a little carriage by young fellows.<a href="#note_487" id="noteref_487" name="noteref_487"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">487</span></span></a> The custom of the Harvest Queen appears to have been common in England. Brand quotes from Hutchinson's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Northumberland</span></span> the following: <span class="tei tei-q">“I have seen, in some places, an image apparelled in great finery, crowned with flowers, a sheaf of corn placed under her arm, and a scycle in her hand, carried out of the village in the morning of the conclusive reaping day, with music and much clamour of the reapers, into the field, where it stands fixed on a pole all day, and when the reaping is done, is brought home in like manner. This they call the Harvest Queen, and it represents the Roman Ceres.”</span><a href="#note_488" id="noteref_488" name="noteref_488"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">488</span></span></a> Again, the traveller Dr. E. D. Clarke tells us that <span class="tei tei-q">“even in the town of Cambridge, and centre of our University, such curious remains of antient customs may be noticed, in different seasons of the year, which pass without observation. The custom of blowing horns upon the first of May (Old Style) is derived from a festival in honour of Diana. At the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Hawkie</span></span>, as it is called, or Harvest Home, I have seen a clown dressed in woman's clothes, having his face painted, his head decorated with ears of corn, and bearing about him other symbols of Ceres, carried in a waggon, with great pomp and loud shouts, through the streets, the horses being covered with white sheets: and when I inquired the meaning of the ceremony, was answered by the people that they were drawing the Morgay (ΜΗΤΗΡ ΓΗ) or Harvest Queen.”</span><a href="#note_489" id="noteref_489" name="noteref_489"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">489</span></span></a> Milton must have been familiar with the custom of the Harvest Queen, for in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Paradise Lost</span></span><a href="#note_490" id="noteref_490" name="noteref_490"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">490</span></span></a> he says:—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 16.20em">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Adam the while</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Waiting desirous her return, had wove</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Of choicest flow'rs a garland to adorn</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Her tresses, and her rural labours crown,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">As reapers oft are wont their harvest-queen.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>Often customs of this sort are practised, not on the harvest-field but on the threshing-floor. The spirit of the corn, fleeing before the reapers as they cut down the ripe grain, quits the reaped corn and takes refuge in the barn, where it appears in the last sheaf threshed, either to perish under the blows of the flail or to flee thence to the still unthreshed corn of a neighbouring farm.<a href="#note_491" id="noteref_491" name="noteref_491"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">491</span></span></a> Thus the last corn to be threshed is called the Mother-Corn or the Old Woman. Sometimes the person who gives the last stroke with the flail is called the Old Woman, and is wrapt in the straw of the last sheaf, or has a bundle of straw fastened on his back. Whether wrapt in the straw or carrying it on his back, he is carted through the village amid general laughter. In some districts of Bavaria, Thüringen, and elsewhere, the man who threshes the last sheaf is said to have the Old Woman or the Old Corn-woman; he is tied up in straw, carried or carted about the village, and set down at last on the dunghill, or taken to the threshing-floor of a neighbouring farmer who has not finished his threshing.<a href="#note_492" id="noteref_492" name="noteref_492"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">492</span></span></a> In Poland the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is called Baba (Old Woman); he is wrapt in corn and wheeled through the village.<a href="#note_493" id="noteref_493" name="noteref_493"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">493</span></span></a> Sometimes in Lithuania the last sheaf is not threshed, but is fashioned into female shape and carried to the barn of a neighbour who has not finished his threshing.<a href="#note_494" id="noteref_494" name="noteref_494"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">494</span></span></a></p>
				<p>At Chorinchen, near Neustadt, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“get the Old Man.”</span><a href="#note_495" id="noteref_495" name="noteref_495"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">495</span></span></a> In various parts of Austrian Silesia he is called the corn-fool, the oats-fool, and so forth according to the crop, and retains the name till the next kind of grain has been reaped. Sometimes he is called the <i xml:lang="de">Klöppel</i> or mallet. He is much ridiculed and in the Bennisch district he is dressed out in the threshing-implements and obliged to carry them about the farmyard to the amusement of his fellows. In Dobischwald the man who gives the last stroke at threshing has to carry a log or puppet of wood wrapt in straw to a neighbour who has not yet finished his threshing. There he throws his burden into the barn, crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“There you have the Mallet (<i xml:lang="de">Klöppel</i>),”</span> and makes off as fast as he can. If they catch him, they tie the puppet on his back, and he is known as the Mallet (<i xml:lang="de">Klöppel</i>) for the whole of the year; he may be the Corn-mallet or the Wheat-mallet or so forth according to the particular crop.<a href="#note_496" id="noteref_496" name="noteref_496"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">496</span></span></a></p>
				<p>About Berneck, in Upper Franken, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing runs away. If the others catch him, he gets <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Woman,”</span> that is, the largest dumpling, which elsewhere is baked in human shape. The custom of setting a dumpling baked in the form of an old woman before the man who has given the last stroke at threshing is also observed in various parts of Middle Franken. Sometimes the excised genitals of a calf are served up to him at table.<a href="#note_497" id="noteref_497" name="noteref_497"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">497</span></span></a> At Langenbielau in Silesia the last sheaf, which is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man,”</span> is threshed separately and the corn ground into meal and baked into a loaf. This loaf is believed to possess healing virtue and to bring a blessing; hence none but members of the family may partake of it. At Wittichenau, in the district of Hoyerswerda (Silesia), when the threshing is ended, some of the straw of <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man”</span> is carried to a neighbour who has not yet finished his threshing, and the bearer is rewarded with a gratuity.<a href="#note_498" id="noteref_498" name="noteref_498"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">498</span></span></a> Among the Germans of the Falkenauer district in West Bohemia the man who gives the last stroke at threshing gets <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man,”</span> a hideous scarecrow, tied on his back. If threshing is still proceeding at another farm, he may go thither and rid himself of his burden, but must take care not to be caught. In this way a farmer who is behind-hand with his threshing may receive several such scarecrows, and so become the target for many gibes. Among the Germans of the Planer district in West Bohemia, the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is himself called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Old Man.”</span> Similarly at flax-dressing in Silberberg (West Bohemia), the woman who is the last to finish her task is said to get the Old Man, and a cake baked in human form is served up to her at supper.<a href="#note_499" id="noteref_499" name="noteref_499"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">499</span></span></a> The Wends of Saxony say of the man who gives the last stroke at threshing that <span class="tei tei-q">“he has struck the Old Man”</span> (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">wón je stareho bil</span></span>), and he is obliged to carry a straw puppet to a neighbour, who has not yet finished his threshing, where he throws the puppet unobserved over the fence.<a href="#note_500" id="noteref_500" name="noteref_500"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">500</span></span></a> In some parts of Sweden, when a stranger woman appears on the threshing-floor, a flail is put round her body, stalks of corn are wound round her neck, a crown of ears is placed on her head, and the threshers call out, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behold the Corn-woman.”</span> Here the stranger woman, thus suddenly appearing, is taken to be the corn-spirit who has just been expelled by the flails from the corn-stalks.<a href="#note_501" id="noteref_501" name="noteref_501"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">501</span></span></a> In other cases the farmer's wife represents the corn-spirit. Thus in the Commune of Saligné, Canton de Poiret (Vendée), the farmer's wife, along with the last sheaf, is tied up in a sheet, placed on a litter, and carried to the threshing machine, under which she is shoved. Then the woman is drawn out and the sheaf is threshed by itself, but the woman is tossed in the sheet, as if she were being winnowed.<a href="#note_502" id="noteref_502" name="noteref_502"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">502</span></span></a> It would be impossible to express more clearly the identification of the woman with the corn than by this graphic imitation of threshing and winnowing her. Mitigated forms of the custom are observed in various places. Thus among the Germans of Schüttarschen in West Bohemia it was customary at the close of the threshing to <span class="tei tei-q">“throttle”</span> the farmer's wife by squeezing her neck between the arms of a flail till she consented to bake a special kind of cake called a <i xml:lang="de">drischala</i> (from <i xml:lang="de">dreschen</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“to thresh”</span>).<a href="#note_503" id="noteref_503" name="noteref_503"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">503</span></span></a> A similar custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“throttling”</span> the farmer's wife at the threshing is practised in some parts of Bavaria, only there the pressure is applied by means of a straw rope instead of a flail.<a href="#note_504" id="noteref_504" name="noteref_504"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">504</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In these customs the spirit of the ripe corn is regarded as old, or at least as of mature age. Hence the names of Mother, Grandmother, Old Woman, and so forth. But in other cases the corn-spirit is conceived as young. Thus at Saldern, near Wolfenbuttel, when the rye has been reaped, three sheaves are tied together with a rope so as to make a puppet with the corn ears for a head. This puppet is called the Maiden or the Corn-maiden (<i xml:lang="de">Kornjungfer</i>).<a href="#note_505" id="noteref_505" name="noteref_505"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">505</span></span></a> Sometimes the corn-spirit is conceived as a child who is separated from its mother by the stroke of the sickle. This last view appears in the Polish custom of calling out to the man who cuts the last handful of corn, <span class="tei tei-q">“You have cut the navel-string.”</span><a href="#note_506" id="noteref_506" name="noteref_506"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">506</span></span></a> In some districts of West Prussia the figure made out of the last sheaf is called the Bastard, and a boy is wrapt up in it. The woman who binds the last sheaf and represents the Corn-mother is told that she is about to be brought to bed; she cries like a woman in travail, and an old woman in the character of grandmother acts as midwife. At last a cry is raised that the child is born; whereupon the boy who is tied up in the sheaf whimpers and squalls like an infant. The grandmother wraps a sack, in imitation of swaddling bands, round the pretended baby, who is carried joyfully to the barn, lest he should catch cold in the open air.<a href="#note_507" id="noteref_507" name="noteref_507"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">507</span></span></a> In other parts of North Germany the last sheaf, or the puppet made out of it, is called the Child, the Harvest-Child, and so on, and they call out to the woman who binds the last sheaf, <span class="tei tei-q">“you are getting the child.”</span><a href="#note_508" id="noteref_508" name="noteref_508"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">508</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In the north of England, particularly in the counties of Northumberland, Durham, and Yorkshire, the last corn cut on the field at harvest is or used to be variously known as the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mell</span></span> or the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kirn</span></span>, of which <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kern</span></span> and <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">churn</span></span> are merely local or dialectical variations. The corn so cut is either plaited or made up into a doll-like figure, which goes by the name of the mell-doll or the kirn-doll, or the kirn-baby, and is brought home with rejoicings at the end of the harvest.<a href="#note_509" id="noteref_509" name="noteref_509"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">509</span></span></a> In the North Riding of Yorkshire the last sheaf gathered in is called the Mell-sheaf, and the expression <span class="tei tei-q">“We've gotten wer mell”</span> is as much as to say <span class="tei tei-q">“The Harvest is finished.”</span> Formerly a Mell-doll was made out of a sheaf of corn decked with flowers and wrapped in such of the reapers' garments as could be spared. It was carried with music and dancing to the scene of the harvest-supper, which was called the mell-supper.<a href="#note_510" id="noteref_510" name="noteref_510"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">510</span></span></a> In the north of Yorkshire the mell-sheaf <span class="tei tei-q">“was frequently made of such dimensions as to be a heavy load for a man, and, within a few years comparatively, was proposed as the prize to be won in a race of old women. In other cases it was carefully preserved and set up in some conspicuous place in the farmhouse.”</span><a href="#note_511" id="noteref_511" name="noteref_511"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">511</span></span></a> Where the last sheaf of corn cut was called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kirn</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kern</span></span> instead of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mell</span></span>, the customs concerned with it seem to have been essentially similar. Thus we are told that in the north it was common for the reapers, on the last day of the reaping, <span class="tei tei-q">“to have a contention for superiority in quickness of dispatch, groups of three or four taking each a ridge, and striving which should soonest get to its termination. In Scotland, this was called a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kemping</span></span>, which simply means a striving. In the north of England, it was a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mell</span></span>.... As the reapers went on during the last day, they took care to leave a good handful of the grain uncut, but laid down flat, and covered over; and, when the field was done, the <span class="tei tei-q">‘bonniest lass’</span> was allowed to cut this final handful, which was presently dressed up with various sewings, tyings, and trimmings, like a doll, and hailed as a <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">Corn Baby</span></em>. It was brought home in triumph, with music of fiddles and bagpipes, was set up conspicuously that night at supper, and was usually preserved in the farmer's parlour for the remainder of the year. The bonny lass who cut this handful of grain was deemed the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">Har'st Queen</span></em>”</span>.<a href="#note_512" id="noteref_512" name="noteref_512"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">512</span></span></a> To cut the last portion of standing corn in the harvest field was known as <span class="tei tei-q">“to get the kirn”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“to win the kirn”</span>; and as soon as this was done the reapers let the neighbours know that the harvest was finished by giving three cheers, which was called <span class="tei tei-q">“to cry or shout the kirn.”</span><a href="#note_513" id="noteref_513" name="noteref_513"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">513</span></span></a> Where the last handful of standing corn was called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">churn</span></span>, the stalks were roughly plaited together, and the reapers threw their sickles at it till some one cut it through, which was called <span class="tei tei-q">“cutting the churn.”</span> The severed churn (that is, the plaited corn) was then placed over the kitchen door or over the hob in the chimney for good luck, and as a charm against witchcraft.<a href="#note_514" id="noteref_514" name="noteref_514"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">514</span></span></a> In Kent the Ivy Girl is, or used to be, <span class="tei tei-q">“a figure composed of some of the best corn the field produces, and made as well as they can into a human shape; this is afterwards curiously dressed by the women, and adorned with paper trimmings, cut to resemble a cap, ruffles, handkerchief, etc., of the finest lace. It is brought home with the last load of corn from the field upon the waggon, and they suppose entitles them to a supper at the expense of the employer.”</span><a href="#note_515" id="noteref_515" name="noteref_515"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">515</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In some parts of Scotland, as well as in the north of England, the last handful of corn cut on the harvest-field was called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kirn</span></span>, and the person who carried it off was said <span class="tei tei-q">“to win the kirn.”</span> It was then dressed up like a child's doll and went by the name of the kirn-baby, the kirn-doll, or the Maiden.<a href="#note_516" id="noteref_516" name="noteref_516"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">516</span></span></a> In Berwickshire down to about the middle of the nineteenth century there was an eager competition among the reapers to cut the last bunch of standing corn. They gathered round it at a little distance and threw their sickles in turn at it, and the man who succeeded in cutting it through gave it to the girl he preferred. She made the corn so cut into a kirn-dolly and dressed it, and the doll was then taken to the farmhouse and hung up there till the next harvest, when its place was taken by the new kirn-dolly.<a href="#note_517" id="noteref_517" name="noteref_517"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">517</span></span></a> At Spottiswoode (Westruther Parish) in Berwickshire the reaping of the last corn at harvest was called <span class="tei tei-q">“cutting the Queen”</span> almost as often as <span class="tei tei-q">“cutting the kirn.”</span> The mode of cutting it was not by throwing sickles. One of the reapers consented to be blindfolded, and having been given a sickle in his hand and turned twice or thrice about by his fellows, he was bidden to go and cut the kirn. His groping about and making wild strokes in the air with his sickle excited much hilarity. When he had tired himself out in vain and given up the task as hopeless, another reaper was blindfolded and pursued the quest, and so on, one after the other, till at last the kirn was cut. The successful reaper was tossed up in the air with three cheers by his brother harvesters. To decorate the room in which the kirn-supper was held at Spottiswoode as well as the granary, where the dancing took place, two women made kirn-dollies or Queens every year; and many of these rustic effigies of the corn-spirit might be seen hanging up together.<a href="#note_518" id="noteref_518" name="noteref_518"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">518</span></span></a> At Lanfine in Ayrshire, down to near the end of the nineteenth century, the last bunch of standing corn at harvest was, occasionally at least, plaited together, and the reapers tried to cut it by throwing their sickles at it; when they failed in the attempt, a woman has been known to run in and sever the stalks at a blow. In Dumfriesshire also, within living memory, it used to be customary to cut the last standing corn by throwing the sickles at it.<a href="#note_519" id="noteref_519" name="noteref_519"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">519</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In the north of Ireland the harvest customs were similar, but there, as in some parts of England, the last patch of standing corn bore the name of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">churn</span></span>, a dialectical variation of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kirn</span></span>. <span class="tei tei-q">“The custom of <span class="tei tei-q">‘Winning the Churn’</span> was prevalent all through the counties of Down and Antrim fifty years ago. It was carried out at the end of the harvest, or reaping the grain, on each farm or holding, were it small or large. Oats are the main crop of the district, but the custom was the same for other kinds of grain. When the reapers had nearly finished the last field a handful of the best-grown stalks was selected, carefully plaited as it stood, and fastened at the top just under the ears to keep the plait in place. Then when all the corn was cut from about this, which was known as <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">The Churn</span></span>, and the sheaves about it had been removed to some distance, the reapers stood in a group about ten yards off it, and each whirled his sickle at the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Churn</span></span> till one lucky one succeeded in cutting it down, when he was cheered on his achievement. This person had then the right of presenting it to the master or mistress of the farm, who gave the reaper a shilling.”</span> A supper and a dance of the reapers in the farmhouse often concluded the day. The <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Churn</span></span>, trimmed and adorned with ribbons, was hung up on a wall in the farmhouse and carefully preserved. It was no uncommon sight to see six or even twelve or more such <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Churns</span></span> decorating the walls of a farmhouse in County Down or Antrim.<a href="#note_520" id="noteref_520" name="noteref_520"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">520</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In some parts of the Highlands of Scotland the last handful of corn that is cut by the reapers on any particular farm is called the Maiden, or in Gaelic <i xml:lang="gd">Maidhdeanbuain</i>, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“the shorn Maiden.”</span> Superstitions attach to the winning of the Maiden. If it is got by a young person, they think it an omen that he or she will be married before another harvest. For that or other reasons there is a strife between the reapers as to who shall get the Maiden, and they resort to various stratagems for the purpose of securing it. One of them, for example, will often leave a handful of corn uncut and cover it up with earth to hide it from the other reapers, till all the rest of the corn on the field is cut down. Several may try to play the same trick, and the one who is coolest and holds out longest obtains the coveted distinction. When it has been cut, the Maiden is dressed with ribbons into a sort of doll and affixed to a wall of the farmhouse. In the north of Scotland the Maiden is carefully preserved till Yule morning, when it is divided among the cattle "to make them thrive all the year round."<a href="#note_521" id="noteref_521" name="noteref_521"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">521</span></span></a> In the island of Mull and some parts of the mainland of Argyleshire the last handful of corn cut is called the Maiden (<i xml:lang="gd">Maighdean-Bhuana</i>). Near Ardrishaig, in Argyleshire, the Maiden is made up in a fanciful three-cornered shape, decorated with ribbons, and hung from a nail on the wall.<a href="#note_522" id="noteref_522" name="noteref_522"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">522</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The following account of the Maiden was obtained in the summer of 1897 from the manager of a farm near Kilmartin in Argyleshire: <span class="tei tei-q">“The <i xml:lang="gd">Mhaighdean-Bhuana</i>, or <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">Reaping Maiden</span></em>, was the last sheaf of oats to be cut on a croft or farm. Before the reaping-machine and binder took the place of the sickle and the scythe, the young reapers of both sexes, when they neared the end of the last rig or field, used to manœuvre to gain possession of the <i xml:lang="gd">Mhaighdean-Bhuana</i>. The individual who was fortunate enough to obtain it was <i xml:lang="la">ex officio</i> entitled to be the King or the Queen of the Harvest-Home festival. The sheaf so designated was carefully preserved and kept intact until the day they began leading home the corn. A tuft of it was then given to each of the horses, as they started from the corn-field with their first load. The rest of it was neatly made up, and hung in some conspicuous corner of the farmhouse, where it remained till it was replaced by a younger sister next season. On the first day of ploughing a tuft of it was given (as on the first day of leading home the corn) as a <i xml:lang="gd">Sainnseal</i> or handsel for luck to the horses. The <i xml:lang="gd">Mhaighdean-Bhuana</i> so preserved and used was a symbol that the harvest had been duly secured, and that the spring work had been properly inaugurated. It was also believed to be a protection against fairies and witchcraft.”</span><a href="#note_523" id="noteref_523" name="noteref_523"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">523</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In the parish of Longforgan, situated at the south-eastern corner of Perthshire, it used to be customary to give what was called the Maiden Feast at the end of the harvest. The last handful of corn reaped on the field was called the Maiden, and things were generally so arranged that it fell into the hands of a pretty girl. It was then decked out with ribbons and brought home in triumph to the music of bagpipes and fiddles. In the evening the reapers danced and made merry. Afterwards the Maiden was dressed out, generally in the form of a cross, and hung up, with the date attached to it, in a conspicuous part of the house.<a href="#note_524" id="noteref_524" name="noteref_524"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">524</span></span></a> In the neighbourhood of Balquhidder, Perthshire, the last handful of corn is cut by the youngest girl on the field, and is made into the rude form of a female doll, clad in a paper dress, and decked with ribbons. It is called the Maiden, and is kept in the farmhouse, generally above the chimney, for a good while, sometimes till the Maiden of the next year is brought in. The writer of this book witnessed the ceremony of cutting the Maiden at Balquhidder in September 1888.<a href="#note_525" id="noteref_525" name="noteref_525"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">525</span></span></a> A lady friend<a href="#note_526" id="noteref_526" name="noteref_526"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">526</span></span></a> informed me that as a young girl she cut the Maiden several times at the request of the reapers in the neighbourhood of Perth. The name of the Maiden was given to the last handful of standing corn; a reaper held the top of the bunch while she cut it. Afterwards the bunch was plaited, decked with ribbons, and hung up in a conspicuous place on the wall of the kitchen till the next Maiden was brought in. The harvest-supper in this neighbourhood was also called the Maiden; the reapers danced at it.</p>
				<p>In the Highland district of Lochaber dancing and merry-making on the last night of harvest used to be universal and are still generally observed. Here, we are told, the festivity without the Maiden would be like a wedding without the bride. The Maiden is carried home with tumultuous rejoicing, and after being suitably decorated is hung up in the barn, where the dancing usually takes place. When supper is over, one of the company, generally the oldest man present, drinks a glass of whisky, after turning to the suspended sheaf and saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Here's to the Maiden.”</span> The company follow his example, each in turn drinking to the Maiden. Then the dancing begins.<a href="#note_527" id="noteref_527" name="noteref_527"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">527</span></span></a> On some farms on the Gareloch, in Dumbartonshire, about the year 1830, the last handful of standing corn was called the Maiden. It was divided in two, plaited, and then cut with the sickle by a girl, who, it was thought, would be lucky and would soon be married. When it was cut the reapers gathered together and threw their sickles in the air. The Maiden was dressed with ribbons and hung in the kitchen near the roof, where it was kept for several years with the date attached. Sometimes five or six Maidens might be seen hanging at once on hooks. The harvest-supper was called the Kirn.<a href="#note_528" id="noteref_528" name="noteref_528"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">528</span></span></a> In other farms on the Gareloch the last handful of corn was called the Maidenhead or the Head; it was neatly plaited, sometimes decked with ribbons, and hung in the kitchen for a year, when the grain was given to the poultry.<a href="#note_529" id="noteref_529" name="noteref_529"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">529</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In the north-east of Aberdeenshire the customs connected with the last corn cut at harvest have been carefully collected and recorded by the late Rev. Walter Gregor of Pitsligo. His account runs as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“The last sheaf cut is the object of much care: the manner of cutting it, binding it, and carrying it to the house varies a little in the different districts. The following customs have been reported to me by people who have seen them or who have practised them, and some of the customs have now disappeared. The information comes from the parishes of Pitsligo, Aberdour, and Tyrie, situated in the north-east corner of the county of Aberdeen, but the customs are not limited to these parishes.</span></p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“Some particulars relating to the sheaf may be noted as always the same; thus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">a</span></span>) it is cut and gathered by the youngest person present in the field, the person who is supposed to be the purest; (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">b</span></span>) the sheaf is not allowed to touch the ground; (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">c</span></span>) it is made up and carried in triumph to the house; (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">d</span></span>) it occupies a conspicuous place in the festivals which follow the end of the reaping; (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e</span></span>) it is kept till Christmas morning, and is then given to one or more of the horses or to the cattle of the farm.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“Before the introduction of the scythe, the corn was cut by the sickle or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">heuck</span></span>, a kind of curved sickle. The last sheaf was shorn or cut by the youngest girl present. As the corn might not touch the ground, the master or <span class="tei tei-q">‘gueedman’</span> sat down, placed the band on his knees, and received thereupon each handful as it was cut. The sheaf was bound, dressed as a woman, and when it had been brought to the house, it was placed in some part of the kitchen, where everybody could see it during the meal which followed the end of the reaping. This sheaf was called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">clyack</span></span> sheaf.<a href="#note_530" id="noteref_530" name="noteref_530"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">530</span></span></a></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The manner of receiving and binding the last sheaf is not always the same. Here is another: three persons hold the band in their hands, one of them at each end, while the third holds the knot in the middle. Each handful of corn is placed so that the cut end is turned to the breast of those who support the ears on the opposite side. When all is cut, the youngest boy ties the knot. Two other bands are fastened to the sheaf, one near the cut end, the other near the ears. The sheaf is carried to the house by those who have helped to cut or bind it (Aberdour).</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“Since the introduction of the scythe, it is the youngest boy who cuts the last sheaf; my informant (a woman) told me that when he was not strong enough to wield the scythe, his hand was guided by another. The youngest girl gathers it. When it is bound with three bands, it is cut straight, and it is not allowed to touch the ground. The youngest girls carry it to the house. My informant (a woman) told me that she had seen it decked and placed at the head of the bed. Formerly, and still sometimes, there was always a bed in the kitchen (Tyrie).</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The corn is not allowed to fall on the ground: the young girls who gather it take it by the ear and convey it handful by handful, till the whole sheaf is cut. A woman who <span class="tei tei-q">‘has lost a feather of her wing,’</span> as an old woman put it to me, may not touch it. Sometimes also they merely put the two hands round the sheaf (New Deer).</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“Generally a feast and dance follow when all the wheat is cut. This feast and dance bear the name of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">clyack</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-q">‘meal and ale.’</span> However, some people do not give <span class="tei tei-q">‘meal and ale’</span> till all the cut corn has been got in: then the feast is called <span class="tei tei-q">‘the Winter’</span> and they say that a farmer <span class="tei tei-q">‘has the Winter’</span> when all his sheaves have been carried home.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“At this feast two things are indispensable: a cheese called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">clyack-kebback</span></span> and <span class="tei tei-q">‘meal and ale.’</span></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The cheese <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">clyack-kebback</span></span> must be cut by the master of the house. The first slice is larger than the rest; it is known by the name of <span class="tei tei-q">‘the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kanave's faang</span></span>,’</span>—the young man's big slice—and is generally the share of the herd boy (Tyrie).</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The dish called <span class="tei tei-q">‘meal and ale’</span> is made as follows. You take a suitable vessel, whether an earthenware pot or a milk-bowl, if the crockery is scanty; but if on the contrary the family is well off, they use other special utensils. In each dish ale is poured and treacle is added to sweeten it. Then oatmeal is mixed with the sweetened ale till the whole is of a sufficient consistency. The cook adds whisky to the mixture in such proportion as she thinks fit. In each plate is put a ring. To allow the meal time to be completely absorbed, the dish is prepared on the morning of the feast. At the moment of the feast the dish or dishes containing the strong and savoury mixture are set on the middle of the table. But it is not served up till the end. Six or seven persons generally have a plate to themselves. Each of them plunges his spoon into the plate as fast as possible in the hope of getting the ring; for he who is lucky enough to get it will be married within the year. Meantime some of the stuff is swallowed, but often in the struggle some of it is spilt on the table or the floor.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“In some districts there used to be and still is dancing in the evening of the feast. <span class="tei tei-q">‘The sheaf’</span> figured in the dances. It was dressed as a girl and carried on the back of the mistress of the house to the barn or granary which served as a ballroom. The mistress danced a reel with <span class="tei tei-q">‘the sheaf’</span> on her back.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The woman who gave me this account had been a witness of what she described when she was a girl. The sheaf was afterwards carefully stored till the first day of Christmas, when it was given to eat to a mare in foal, if there was one on the farm, or, if there was not, to the oldest cow in calf. Elsewhere the sheaf was divided between all the cows and their calves or between all the horses and the cattle of the farm. (Related by an eye-witness.)”</span><a href="#note_531" id="noteref_531" name="noteref_531">
						<span class="tei tei-noteref">
							<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">531</span>
						</span>
					</a>
				</p>
				<p>In these Aberdeenshire customs the sanctity attributed to the last corn cut at harvest is clearly manifested, not merely by the ceremony with which it is treated on the field, in the house, and in the barn, but also by the great care taken to prevent it from touching the ground or being handled by any unchaste person. The reason why the youngest person on the field, whether a girl or a boy, is chosen to cut the last standing corn and sometimes to carry it to the house is no doubt a calculation that the younger the person the more likely is he or she to be sexually pure. We have seen that for this reason some negroes entrust the sowing of the seed to very young girls,<a href="#note_532" id="noteref_532" name="noteref_532"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">532</span></span></a> and later on we shall meet with more evidence in Africa of the notion that the corn may be handled only by the pure.<a href="#note_533" id="noteref_533" name="noteref_533"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">533</span></span></a> And in the gruel of oat-meal and ale, which the harvesters sup with spoons as an indispensable part of the harvest supper, have we not the Scotch equivalent of the gruel of barley-meal and water, flavoured with pennyroyal, which the initiates at Eleusis drank as a solemn form of communion with the Barley Goddess Demeter?<a href="#note_534" id="noteref_534" name="noteref_534"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">534</span></span></a> May not that mystic sacrament have originated in a simple harvest supper held by Eleusinian farmers at the end of the reaping?</p>
				<p>According to a briefer account of the Aberdeenshire custom, <span class="tei tei-q">“the last sheaf cut, or <span class="tei tei-q">‘maiden,’</span> is carried home in merry procession by the harvesters. It is then presented to the mistress of the house, who dresses it up to be preserved till the first mare foals. The maiden is then taken down and presented to the mare as its first food. The neglect of this would have untoward effects upon the foal, and disastrous consequences upon farm operations generally for the season.”</span><a href="#note_535" id="noteref_535" name="noteref_535"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">535</span></span></a> In Fifeshire the last handful of corn, known as the Maiden, is cut by a young girl and made into the rude figure of a doll, tied with ribbons, by which it is hung on the wall of the farm-kitchen till the next spring.<a href="#note_536" id="noteref_536" name="noteref_536"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">536</span></span></a> The custom of cutting the Maiden at harvest was also observed in Inverness-shire and Sutherlandshire.<a href="#note_537" id="noteref_537" name="noteref_537"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">537</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A somewhat maturer but still youthful age is assigned to the corn-spirit by the appellations of Bride, Oats-bride, and Wheat-bride, which in Germany are sometimes bestowed both on the last sheaf and on the woman who binds it.<a href="#note_538" id="noteref_538" name="noteref_538"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">538</span></span></a> At wheat-harvest near Müglitz, in Moravia, a small portion of the wheat is left standing after all the rest has been reaped. This remnant is then cut, amid the rejoicing of the reapers, by a young girl who wears a wreath of wheaten ears on her head and goes by the name of the Wheat-bride. It is supposed that she will be a real bride that same year.<a href="#note_539" id="noteref_539" name="noteref_539"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">539</span></span></a> In the upland valley of Alpach, in North Tyrol, the person who brings the last sheaf into the granary is said to have the Wheat-bride or the Rye-bride according to the crop, and is received with great demonstrations of respect and rejoicing. The people of the farm go out to meet him, bells are rung, and refreshments offered to him on a tray.<a href="#note_540" id="noteref_540" name="noteref_540"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">540</span></span></a> In Austrian Silesia a girl is chosen to be the Wheat-bride, and much honour is paid to her at the harvest-festival.<a href="#note_541" id="noteref_541" name="noteref_541"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">541</span></span></a> Near Roslin and Stonehaven, in Scotland, the last handful of corn cut <span class="tei tei-q">“got the name of <span class="tei tei-q">‘the bride,’</span> and she was placed over the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">bress</span></span> or chimney-piece; she had a ribbon tied below her numerous <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ears</span></span>, and another round her waist.”</span><a href="#note_542" id="noteref_542" name="noteref_542"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">542</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Sometimes the idea implied by the name of Bride is worked out more fully by representing the productive powers of vegetation as bride and bridegroom. Thus in the Vorharz an Oats-man and an Oats-woman, swathed in straw, dance at the harvest feast.<a href="#note_543" id="noteref_543" name="noteref_543"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">543</span></span></a> In South Saxony an Oats-bridegroom and an Oats-bride figure together at the harvest celebration. The Oats-bridegroom is a man completely wrapt in oats-straw; the Oats-bride is a man dressed in woman's clothes, but not wrapt in straw. They are drawn in a waggon to the ale-house, where the dance takes place. At the beginning of the dance the dancers pluck the bunches of oats one by one from the Oats-bridegroom, while he struggles to keep them, till at last he is completely stript of them and stands bare, exposed to the laughter and jests of the company.<a href="#note_544" id="noteref_544" name="noteref_544"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">544</span></span></a> In Austrian Silesia the ceremony of <span class="tei tei-q">“the Wheat-bride”</span> is celebrated by the young people at the end of the harvest. The woman who bound the last sheaf plays the part of the Wheat-bride, wearing the harvest-crown of wheat ears and flowers on her head. Thus adorned, standing beside her Bridegroom in a waggon and attended by bridesmaids, she is drawn by a pair of oxen, in full imitation of a marriage procession, to the tavern, where the dancing is kept up till morning. Somewhat later in the season the wedding of the Oats-bride is celebrated with the like rustic pomp. About Neisse, in Silesia, an Oats-king and an Oats-queen, dressed up quaintly as a bridal pair, are seated on a harrow and drawn by oxen into the village.<a href="#note_545" id="noteref_545" name="noteref_545"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">545</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In these last instances the corn-spirit is personified in double form as male and female. But sometimes the spirit appears in a double female form as both old and young, corresponding exactly to the Greek Demeter and Persephone, if my interpretation of these goddesses is right. We have seen that in Scotland, especially among the Gaelic-speaking population, the last corn cut is sometimes called the Old Wife and sometimes the Maiden. Now there are parts of Scotland in which both an Old Wife (<i xml:lang="gd">Cailleach</i>) and a Maiden are cut at harvest. As the accounts of this custom are not quite clear and consistent, it may be well to give them first in the words of the original authorities. Thus the late Sheriff Alexander Nicolson tells us that there is a Gaelic proverb, <span class="tei tei-q">“A balk (<i xml:lang="gd">léum-iochd</i>) in autumn is better than a sheaf the more”</span>; and he explains it by saying that a <i xml:lang="gd">léum-iochd</i> or balk <span class="tei tei-q">“is a strip of a corn-field left fallow. The fear of being left with the last sheaf of the harvest, called the <i xml:lang="gd">cailleach</i>, or <i xml:lang="gd">gobhar bhacach</i>, always led to an exciting competition among the reapers in the last field. The reaper who came on a <i xml:lang="gd">léum-iochd</i> would of course be glad to have so much the less to cut.”</span><a href="#note_546" id="noteref_546" name="noteref_546"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">546</span></span></a> In further explanation of the proverb the writer adds:</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The customs as to the <i xml:lang="gd">Cailleach</i> and <i xml:lang="gd">Maighdean-bhuana</i> seem to have varied somewhat. Two reapers were usually set to each rig, and according to one account, the man who was first done got the <i xml:lang="gd">Maighdean-bhuana</i> or <span class="tei tei-q">‘Reaping-Maiden,’</span> while the man who was last got the <i xml:lang="gd">Cailleach</i> or <span class="tei tei-q">‘old woman.’</span> The latter term is used in Argyleshire; the term <i xml:lang="gd">Gobhar-bhacach</i>, the lame goat, is used in Skye.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“According to what appears to be the better version, the competition to avoid the <i xml:lang="gd">Cailleach</i> was not between reapers but between neighbouring crofters, and the man who got his harvest done first sent a handful of corn called the <i xml:lang="gd">Cailleach</i> to his neighbour, who passed it on, till it landed with him who was latest. That man's penalty was to provide for the dearth of the township, <i xml:lang="gd">gort a' bhaile</i>, in the ensuing season.</span>
				</p>
				<p><span class="tei tei-q">“The <i xml:lang="gd">Maighdean-bhuana</i>, again, was the last cut handful of oats, on a croft or farm, and was an object of lively competition among the reapers. It was tastefully tied up with ribbons, generally dressed like a doll, and then hung up on a nail till spring. On the first day of ploughing it was solemnly taken down, and given as a <i xml:lang="gd">Sainnseal</i> (or handsel) to the horses for luck. It was meant as a symbol that the harvest had been secured, and to ward off the fairies, representatives of the ethereal and unsubstantial, till the time came to provide for a new crop.”</span><a href="#note_547" id="noteref_547" name="noteref_547"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">547</span></span></a> Again, the Rev. Mr. Campbell of Kilchrenan, on Loch Awe, furnished Dr. R. C. Maclagan with the following account of the Highland customs at harvest. The recollections of Mrs. MacCorquodale, then resident at Kilchrenan, refer to the customs practised about the middle of the nineteenth century in the wild and gloomy valley of Glencoe, infamous in history for the treacherous massacre perpetrated there by the Government troops in 1692. <span class="tei tei-q">“Mrs. MacCorquodale says that the rivalry was for the Maiden, and for the privilege she gave of sending the Cailleach to the next neighbour. The Maiden was represented by the last stalks reaped; the Cailleach by a handful taken at random from the field, perhaps the last rig of the reaper last to finish. The Cailleach was not dressed but carried after binding to the neighbour's field. The Maiden was cut in the following manner. All the reapers gathered round her and kept a short distance from her. They then threw their hooks [sickles] at her. The person successful in cutting her down in this manner was the man whose possession she became. Mrs. MacCorquodale understood that the man of a township who got the Cailleach finally was supposed to be doomed to poverty for his want of energy. (Gaelic: <i xml:lang="gd">treubhantas</i>—valour.)</span></p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“A sample of the toast to the Cailleach at the harvest entertainment was as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">‘The Cailleach is with ... and is now with (me) since I was the last. I drink to her health. Since she assisted me in harvest, it is likely that it is with me she will abide during the winter.’</span> In explaining the above toast Mr. Campbell says that it signifies that the Cailleach is always with agriculturists. <span class="tei tei-q">‘She has been with others before and is now with me (the proposer of the toast). Though I did my best to avoid her I welcome her as my assistant, and am prepared to entertain her during the winter.’</span> Another form of the toast was as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">‘To your health, good wife, who for harvest has come to help us, and if I live I'll try to support you when winter comes.’</span></span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“John MacCorquodale, Kilchrenan, says that at Crianlarich in Strath Fillan, they make a Cailleach of sticks and a turnip, old clothes and a pipe. In this case the effigy passed in succession to seven farms, which he mentioned, and finally settled with an innkeeper. The list suggested that the upper farms stood a bad chance, and perhaps that a prosperous innkeeper could more easily bear up against the reproach and loss (?) of supporting the Cailleach.</span>
				</p>
				<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Duncan MacIntyre, Kilchrenan, says that in one case where the last field to be reaped was the most fertile land on the farm, the corn first cut in it, which was taken near the edge, was reserved to make a Cailleach, should the owner be so happy as to be able to pass her on to his neighbour. The last blades cut were generally in the middle or best part of the field. These in any event became the Maiden.”</span> Lastly, Dr. Maclagan observes that <span class="tei tei-q">“having directed the attention of Miss Kerr, Port Charlotte, Islay, to the practice of having two different bunches on the mainland of Argyle, she informs me that in Islay and Kintyre the last handful is the Cailleach, and they have no Maiden. The same is the custom in Bernara and other parts of the Western Isles, while in Mull the last handful is the Maiden, and they have no Cailleach. In North Uist the habit still prevails of putting the Cailleach over-night among the standing corn of lazy crofters.”</span><a href="#note_548" id="noteref_548" name="noteref_548"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">548</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The general rule to which these various accounts point seems to be that, where both a Maiden and an Old Wife (<i xml:lang="gd">Cailleach</i>) are fashioned out of the reaped corn at harvest, the Maiden is always made out of the last stalks left standing, and is kept by the farmer on whose land it was cut; while the Old Wife is made out of other stalks, sometimes out of the first stalks cut, and is regularly passed on to a laggard farmer who happens to be still reaping after his brisker neighbour has cut all his corn. Thus while each farmer keeps his own Maiden, as the embodiment of the young and fruitful spirit of the corn, he passes on the Old Wife as soon as he can to a neighbour, and so the old lady may make the round of all the farms in the district before she finds a place in which to lay her venerable head. The farmer with whom she finally takes up her abode is of course the one who has been the last of all the countryside to finish reaping his crops, and thus the distinction of entertaining her is rather an invidious one. Similarly we saw that in Pembrokeshire, where the last corn cut is called, not the Maiden, but the Hag, she is passed on hastily to a neighbour who is still at work in his fields and who receives his aged visitor with anything but a transport of joy. If the Old Wife represents the corn-spirit of the past year, as she probably does wherever she is contrasted with and opposed to a Maiden, it is natural enough that her faded charms should have less attractions for the husbandman than the buxom form of her daughter, who may be expected to become in her turn the mother of the golden grain when the revolving year has brought round another autumn. The same desire to get rid of the effete Mother of the Corn by palming her off on other people comes out clearly in some of the customs observed at the close of threshing, particularly in the practice of passing on a hideous straw puppet to a neighbour farmer who is still threshing his corn.<a href="#note_549" id="noteref_549" name="noteref_549"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">549</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The harvest customs just described are strikingly analogous to the spring customs which we reviewed in the first part of this work. (1) As in the spring customs the tree-spirit is represented both by a tree and by a person,<a href="#note_550" id="noteref_550" name="noteref_550"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">550</span></span></a> so in the harvest customs the corn-spirit is represented both by the last sheaf and by the person who cuts or binds or threshes it. The equivalence of the person to the sheaf is shewn by giving him or her the same name as the sheaf; by wrapping him or her in it; and by the rule observed in some places, that when the sheaf is called the Mother, it must be made up into human shape by the oldest married woman, but that when it is called the Maiden, it must be cut by the youngest girl.<a href="#note_551" id="noteref_551" name="noteref_551"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">551</span></span></a> Here the age of the personal representative of the corn-spirit corresponds with that of the supposed age of the corn-spirit, just as the human victims offered by the Mexicans to promote the growth of the maize varied with the age of the maize.<a href="#note_552" id="noteref_552" name="noteref_552"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">552</span></span></a> For in the Mexican, as in the European, custom the human beings were probably representatives of the corn-spirit rather than victims offered to it. (2) Again, the same fertilising influence which the tree-spirit is supposed to exert over vegetation, cattle, and even women<a href="#note_553" id="noteref_553" name="noteref_553"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">553</span></span></a> is ascribed to the corn-spirit. Thus, its supposed influence on vegetation is shewn by the practice of taking some of the grain of the last sheaf (in which the corn-spirit is regularly supposed to be present), and scattering it among the young corn in spring or mixing it with the seed-corn.<a href="#note_554" id="noteref_554" name="noteref_554"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">554</span></span></a> Its influence on animals is shewn by giving the last sheaf to a mare in foal, to a cow in calf, and to horses at the first ploughing.<a href="#note_555" id="noteref_555" name="noteref_555"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">555</span></span></a> Lastly, its influence on women is indicated by the custom of delivering the Mother-sheaf, made into the likeness of a pregnant woman, to the farmer's wife;<a href="#note_556" id="noteref_556" name="noteref_556"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">556</span></span></a> by the belief that the woman who binds the last sheaf will have a child next year;<a href="#note_557" id="noteref_557" name="noteref_557"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">557</span></span></a> perhaps, too, by the idea that the person who gets it will soon be married.<a href="#note_558" id="noteref_558" name="noteref_558"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">558</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Plainly, therefore, these spring and harvest customs are based on the same ancient modes of thought, and form parts of the same primitive heathendom, which was doubtless practised by our forefathers long before the dawn of history. Amongst the marks of a primitive ritual we may note the following:—</p>
				<p>1. No special class of persons is set apart for the performance of the rites; in other words, there are no priests. The rites may be performed by any one, as occasion demands.</p>
				<p>2. No special places are set apart for the performance of the rites; in other words, there are no temples. The rites may be performed anywhere, as occasion demands.</p>
				<p>3. Spirits, not gods, are recognised. (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">a</span></span>) As distinguished from gods, spirits are restricted in their operations to definite departments of nature. Their names are general, not proper. Their attributes are generic, rather than individual; in other words, there is an indefinite number of spirits of each class, and the individuals of a class are all much alike; they have no definitely marked individuality; no accepted traditions are current as to their origin, life, adventures, and character. (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">b</span></span>) On the other hand gods, as distinguished from spirits, are not restricted to definite departments of nature. It is true that there is generally some one department over which they preside as their special province; but they are not rigorously confined to it; they can exert their power for good or evil in many other spheres of nature and life. Again, they bear individual or proper names, such as Demeter, Persephone, Dionysus; and their individual characters and histories are fixed by current myths and the representations of art.</p>
				<p>4. The rites are magical rather than propitiatory. In other words, the desired objects are attained, not by propitiating the favour of divine beings through sacrifice, prayer, and praise, but by ceremonies which, as I have already explained,<a href="#note_559" id="noteref_559" name="noteref_559"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">559</span></span></a> are believed to influence the course of nature directly through a physical sympathy or resemblance between the rite and the effect which it is the intention of the rite to produce.</p>
				<p>Judged by these tests, the spring and harvest customs of our European peasantry deserve to rank as primitive. For no special class of persons and no special places are set exclusively apart for their performance; they may be performed by any one, master or man, mistress or maid, boy or girl; they are practised, not in temples or churches, but in the woods and meadows, beside brooks, in barns, on harvest fields and cottage floors. The supernatural beings whose existence is taken for granted in them are spirits rather than deities: their functions are limited to certain well-defined departments of nature: their names are general, like the Barley-mother, the Old Woman, the Maiden, not proper names like Demeter, Persephone, Dionysus. Their generic attributes are known, but their individual histories and characters are not the subject of myths. For they exist in classes rather than as individuals, and the members of each class are indistinguishable. For example, every farm has its Corn-mother, or its Old Woman, or its Maiden; but every Corn-mother is much like every other Corn-mother, and so with the Old Women and Maidens. Lastly, in these harvest, as in the spring customs, the ritual is magical rather than propitiatory. This is shewn by throwing the Corn-mother into the river in order to secure rain and dew for the crops;<a href="#note_560" id="noteref_560" name="noteref_560"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">560</span></span></a> by making the Old Woman heavy in order to get a heavy crop next year;<a href="#note_561" id="noteref_561" name="noteref_561"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">561</span></span></a> by strewing grain from the last sheaf amongst the young crops in spring;<a href="#note_562" id="noteref_562" name="noteref_562"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">562</span></span></a> and by giving the last sheaf to the cattle to make them thrive.<a href="#note_563" id="noteref_563" name="noteref_563"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">563</span></span></a></p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
