<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XVII: Types of Animal Sacrament</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-5-17" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Types of Animal Sacrament</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<section id="chapter-5-17-1" epub:type="division">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">The Egyptian and the Aino Types of Sacrament</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>We are now perhaps in a position to understand the ambiguous behaviour of the Aino and Gilyaks towards the bear. It has been shown that the sharp line of demarcation which we draw between mankind and the lower animals does not exist for the savage. To him many of the other animals appear as his equals or even his superiors, not merely in brute force but in intelligence; and if choice or necessity leads him to take their lives, he feels bound, out of regard to his own safety, to do it in a way which will be as inoffensive as possible not merely to the living animal, but to its departed spirit and to all the other animals of the same species, which would resent an affront put upon one of their kind much as a tribe of savages would revenge an injury or insult offered to a tribesman. We have seen that among the many devices by which the savage seeks to atone for the wrong done by him to his animal victims one is to show marked deference to a few chosen individuals of the species, for such behaviour is apparently regarded as entitling him to exterminate with impunity all the rest of the species upon which he can lay hands. This principle perhaps explains the attitude, at first sight puzzling and contradictory, of the Aino towards the bear. The flesh and skin of the bear regularly afford them food and clothing; but since the bear is an intelligent and powerful animal, it is necessary to offer some satisfaction or atonement to the bear species for the loss which it sustains in the death of so many of its members. This satisfaction or atonement is made by rearing young bears, treating them, so long as they live, with respect, and killing them with extraordinary marks of sorrow and devotion. So the other bears are appeased, and do not resent the slaughter of their kind by attacking the slayers or deserting the country, which would deprive the Aino of one of their means of subsistence.</p>
					<p>Thus the primitive worship of animals assumes two forms, which are in some respects the converse of each other. On the one hand, animals are worshipped, and are therefore neither killed nor eaten. On the other hand, animals are worshipped because they are habitually killed and eaten. In both forms of worship the animal is revered on account of some benefit, positive or negative, which the savage hopes to receive from it. In the former worship the benefit comes either in the positive form of protection, advice, and help which the animal affords the man, or in the negative one of abstinence from injuries which it is in the power of the animal to inflict. In the latter worship the benefit takes the material form of the animal’s flesh and skin. The two forms of worship are in some measure antithetical: in the one, the animal is not eaten because it is revered; in the other, it is revered because it is eaten. But both may be practised by the same people, as we see in the case of the North American Indians, who, while they apparently revere and spare their totem animals,<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-926" id="noteref-5-2-926" epub:type="noteref">926</a> also revere the animals and fish upon which they subsist. The aborigines of Australia have totemism in the most primitive form known to us; but, so far as I am aware, there is no clear evidence that they attempt, like the North American Indians, to conciliate the animals which they kill and eat. The means which the Australians adopt to secure a plentiful supply of game appear to be primarily based, not on conciliation, but on sympathetic magic,<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-927" id="noteref-5-2-927" epub:type="noteref">927</a> a principle to which the North American Indians also resort for the same purpose.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-928" id="noteref-5-2-928" epub:type="noteref">928</a> Hence, as the Australians undoubtedly represent a ruder and earlier stage of human progress than the American Indians, it would seem that before hunters think of worshipping the game as a means of ensuring an abundant supply of it, they seek to attain the same end by sympathetic magic. This, again, would show⁠—what there is good reason for believing⁠—that sympathetic magic is one of the earliest means by which man endeavours to adapt the agencies of nature to his needs.</p>
					<p>Corresponding to the two distinct types of animal worship, there are two distinct types of the custom of killing the animal god. On the one hand, when the revered animal is habitually spared, it is nevertheless killed⁠—and sometimes eaten⁠—on rare and solemn occasions. Examples of this custom have been already given and an explanation of them offered. On the other hand, when the revered animal is habitually killed, the slaughter of any one of the species involves the killing of the god, and is atoned for on the spot by apologies and sacrifices, especially when the animal is a powerful and dangerous one; and, in addition to this ordinary and everyday atonement, there is a special annual atonement, at which a select individual of the species is slain with extraordinary marks of respect and devotion. Clearly the two types of sacramental killing⁠—the Egyptian and the Aino types, as we may call them for distinction⁠—are liable to be confounded by an observer; and, before we can say to which type any particular example belongs, it is necessary to ascertain whether the animal sacramentally slain belongs to a species which is habitually spared, or to one which is habitually killed by the tribe. In the former case the example belongs to the Egyptian type of sacrament, in the latter to the Aino type.</p>
					<p>The practice of pastoral tribes appears to furnish examples of both types of sacrament. “Pastoral tribes,” says a learned ethnologist, “being sometimes obliged to sell their herds to strangers who may handle the bones disrespectfully, seek to avert the danger which such a sacrilege would entail by consecrating one of the herd as an object of worship, eating it sacramentally in the family circle with closed doors, and afterwards treating the bones with all the ceremonious respect which, strictly speaking, should be accorded to every head of cattle, but which, being punctually paid to the representative animal, is deemed to be paid to all. Such family meals are found among various peoples, especially those of the Caucasus. When amongst the Abchases the shepherds in spring eat their common meal with their loins girt and their staves in their hands, this may be looked upon both as a sacrament and as an oath of mutual help and support. For the strongest of all oaths is that which is accompanied with the eating of a sacred substance, since the perjured person cannot possibly escape the avenging god whom he has taken into his body and assimilated.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-929" id="noteref-5-2-929" epub:type="noteref">929</a> This kind of sacrament is of the Aino or expiatory type, since it is meant to atone to the species for the possible ill-usage of individuals. An expiation, similar in principle but different in details, is offered by the Kalmucks to the sheep, whose flesh is one of their staple foods. Rich Kalmucks are in the habit of consecrating a white ram under the title of “the ram of heaven” or “the ram of the spirit.” The animal is never shorn and never sold; but when it grows old and its owner wishes to consecrate a new one, the old ram must be killed and eaten at a feast to which the neighbours are invited. On a lucky day, generally in autumn when the sheep are fat, a sorcerer kills the old ram, after sprinkling it with milk. Its flesh is eaten; the skeleton, with a portion of the fat, is burned on a turf altar; and the skin, with the head and feet, is hung up.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-930" id="noteref-5-2-930" epub:type="noteref">930</a></p>
					<p>An example of a sacrament of the Egyptian type is furnished by the Todas, a pastoral people of Southern India, who subsist largely upon the milk of their buffaloes. Amongst them “the buffalo is to a certain degree held sacred” and “is treated with great kindness, even with a degree of adoration, by the people.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-931" id="noteref-5-2-931" epub:type="noteref">931</a> They never eat the flesh of the cow buffalo, and as a rule abstain from the flesh of the male. But to the latter rule there is a single exception. Once a year all the adult males of the village join in the ceremony of killing and eating a very young male calf⁠—seemingly under a month old. They take the animal into the dark recesses of the village wood, where it is killed with a club made from the sacred tree of the Todas (the <i>tûde</i> or <i>Millingtonia</i>). A sacred fire having been made by the rubbing of sticks, the flesh of the calf is roasted on the embers of certain trees, and is eaten by the men alone, women being excluded from the assembly. This is the only occasion on which the Todas eat buffalo flesh.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-932" id="noteref-5-2-932" epub:type="noteref">932</a> The Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa, whose chief wealth is their cattle, though they also practise agriculture, appear to kill a lamb sacramentally on certain solemn occasions. The custom is thus described by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Felkin: “A remarkable custom is observed at stated times⁠—once a year, I am led to believe. I have not been able to ascertain what exact meaning is attached to it. It appears, however, to relieve the people’s minds, for beforehand they evince much sadness, and seem very joyful when the ceremony is duly accomplished. The following is what takes place: A large concourse of people of all ages assemble, and sit down round a circle of stones, which is erected by the side of a road (really a narrow path). A very choice lamb is then fetched by a boy, who leads it four times round the assembled people. As it passes they pluck off little bits of its fleece and place them in their hair, or on to some other part of their body. The lamb is then led up to the stones, and there killed by a man belonging to a kind of priestly order, who takes some of the blood and sprinkles it four times over the people. He then applies it individually. On the children he makes a small ring of blood over the lower end of the breast bone, on women and girls he makes a mark above the breasts, and the men he touches on each shoulder. He then proceeds to explain the ceremony, and to exhort the people to show kindness.⁠ ⁠… When this discourse, which is at times of great length, is over, the people rise, each places a leaf on or by the circle of stones, and then they depart with signs of great joy. The lamb’s skull is hung on a tree near the stones, and its flesh is eaten by the poor. This ceremony is observed on a small scale at other times. If a family is in any great trouble, through illness or bereavement, their friends and neighbours come together and a lamb is killed; this is thought to avert further evil. The same custom prevails at the grave of departed friends, and also on joyful occasions, such as the return of a son home after a very prolonged absence.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-933" id="noteref-5-2-933" epub:type="noteref">933</a> The sorrow thus manifested by the people at the annual slaughter of the lamb clearly indicates that the lamb slain is a sacred or divine animal, whose death is mourned by his worshippers,<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-934" id="noteref-5-2-934" epub:type="noteref">934</a> just as the death of the sacred buzzard was mourned by the Californians and the death of the Theban ram by the Egyptians. The smearing each of the worshippers with the blood of the lamb is a form of communion with the divinity;<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-935" id="noteref-5-2-935" epub:type="noteref">935</a> the vehicle of the divine life is applied externally instead of being taken internally, as when the blood is drunk or the flesh eaten.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-5-17-2" epub:type="division">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">Processions with Sacred Animals</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>The form of communion in which the sacred animal is taken from house to house, that all may enjoy a share of its divine influence, has been exemplified by the Gilyak custom of promenading the bear through the village before it is slain.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-936" id="noteref-5-2-936" epub:type="noteref">936</a> A similar form of communion with the sacred snake is observed by a Snake tribe in the Punjaub. Once a year in the month of September the snake is worshipped by all castes and religions for nine days only. At the end of August the Mirasans, especially those of the Snake tribe, make a snake of dough which they paint black and red, and place on a winnowing basket. This basket they carry round the village, and on entering any house they say:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“God be with you all!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>May every ill be far!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>May our patron’s (Gugga’s) word thrive!”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Then they present the basket with the snake, saying:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“A small cake of flour:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A little bit of butter:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If you obey the snake,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You and yours shall thrive!”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Strictly speaking, a cake and butter should be given, but it is seldom done. Everyone, however, gives something, generally a handful of dough or some corn. In houses where there is a new bride or whence a bride has gone, or where a son has been born, it is usual to give a rupee and a quarter, or some cloth. Sometimes the bearers of the snake also sing:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Give the snake a piece of cloth,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And he will send a lively bride!”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>When every house has been thus visited, the dough snake is buried and a small grave is erected over it. Thither during the nine days of September the women come to worship. They bring a basin of curds, a small portion of which they offer at the snake’s grave, kneeling on the ground and touching the earth with their foreheads. Then they go home and divide the rest of the curds among the children. Here the dough snake is clearly a substitute for a real snake. Indeed, in districts where snakes abound the worship is offered, not at the grave of the dough snake, but in the jungles where snakes are known to be. Besides this yearly worship, performed by all the people, the members of the Snake tribe worship in the same way every morning after a new moon. The Snake tribe is not uncommon in the Punjaub. Members of it will not kill a snake, and they say that its bite does not hurt them. If they find a dead snake, they put clothes on it and give it a regular funeral.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-937" id="noteref-5-2-937" epub:type="noteref">937</a></p>
					<p>Ceremonies closely analogous to this Indian worship of the snake have survived in Europe into recent times, and doubtless date from a very primitive paganism. The best-known example is the “hunting of the wren.” By many European peoples⁠—the ancient Greeks and Romans, the modern Italians, Spaniards, French, Germans, Dutch, Danes, Swedes, English, and Welsh⁠—the wren has been designated the king, the little king, the king of birds, the hedge king, and so forth,<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-938" id="noteref-5-2-938" epub:type="noteref">938</a> and has been reckoned amongst those birds which it is extremely unlucky to kill. In England it is supposed that if anyone kills a wren or harries its nest, he will infallibly break a bone or meet with some dreadful misfortune within the year;<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-939" id="noteref-5-2-939" epub:type="noteref">939</a> sometimes it is thought that the cows will give bloody milk.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-940" id="noteref-5-2-940" epub:type="noteref">940</a> In Scotland the wren is called “the Lady of Heaven’s hen,” and boys say:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Malisons, malisons, mair than ten,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That harry the Ladye of Heaven’s hen!”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-941" id="noteref-5-2-941" epub:type="noteref">941</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>At Saint Donan, in Brittany, people believe that if children touch the young wrens in the nest, they will suffer from the fire of <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence, that is, from pimples on the face, legs, and so on.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-942" id="noteref-5-2-942" epub:type="noteref">942</a> In other parts of France it is thought that if a person kills a wren or harries its nest, his house will be struck by lightning, or that the fingers with which he did the deed will shrivel up and drop off, or at least be maimed, or that his cattle will suffer in their feet.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-943" id="noteref-5-2-943" epub:type="noteref">943</a></p>
					<p>Notwithstanding such beliefs, the custom of annually killing the wren has prevailed widely both in this country and in France. In the Isle of Man down to the eighteenth century the custom was observed on Christmas Eve or rather Christmas morning. On the twenty-fourth of December, towards evening, all the servants got a holiday; they did not go to bed all night, but rambled about till the bells rang in all the churches at midnight. When prayers were over, they went to hunt the wren, and having found one of these birds they killed it and fastened it to the top of a long pole with its wings extended. Thus they carried it in procession to every house chanting the following rhyme:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We hunted the wren for Jack of the Can,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We hunted the wren for Robin the Bobbin,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We hunted the wren for everyone.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>When they had gone from house to house and collected all the money they could, they laid the wren on a bier and carried it in procession to the parish churchyard, where they made a grave and buried it “with the utmost solemnity, singing dirges over her in the Manks language, which they call her knell; after which Christmas begins.” The burial over, the company outside the churchyard formed a circle and danced to music. About the middle of the nineteenth century the burial of the wren took place in the Isle of Man on <abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s Day (the twenty-sixth of December). Boys went from door to door with a wren suspended by the legs in the centre of two hoops, which crossed each other at right angles and were decorated with evergreens and ribbons. The bearers sang certain lines in which reference was made to boiling and eating the bird. If at the close of the song they received a small coin, they gave in return a feather of the wren; so that before the end of the day the bird often hung almost featherless. The wren was then buried, no longer in the churchyard, but on the seashore or in some waste place. The feathers distributed were preserved with religious care, it being believed that every feather was an effectual preservative from shipwreck for a year, and a fisherman would have been thought very foolhardy who had not one of them.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-944" id="noteref-5-2-944" epub:type="noteref">944</a> Even to the present time, in the twentieth century, the custom is generally observed, at least in name, on <abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s Day, throughout the Isle of Man.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-945" id="noteref-5-2-945" epub:type="noteref">945</a></p>
					<p>A writer of the eighteenth century says that in Ireland the wren “is still hunted and killed by the peasants on Christmas Day, and on the following (<abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s Day) he is carried about, hung by the leg, in the centre of two hoops, crossing each other at right angles, and a procession made in every village, of men, women, and children, singing an Irish catch, importing him to be the king of all birds.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-946" id="noteref-5-2-946" epub:type="noteref">946</a> Down to the present time the “hunting of the wren” still takes place in parts of Leinster and Connaught. On Christmas Day or <abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s Day the boys hunt and kill the wren, fasten it in the middle of a mass of holly and ivy on the top of a broomstick, and on <abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s Day go about with it from house to house, singing:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The wren, the wren, the king of all birds,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><abbr>St.</abbr> Stephen’s Day was caught in the furze;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Although he is little, his family’s great,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I pray you, good landlady, give us a treat.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Money or food (bread, butter, eggs, <abbr>etc.</abbr>) were given them, upon which they feasted in the evening.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-947" id="noteref-5-2-947" epub:type="noteref">947</a> In Essex a similar custom used to be observed at Christmas, and the verses sung by the boys were almost identical with those sung in Ireland.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-948" id="noteref-5-2-948" epub:type="noteref">948</a> In Pembrokeshire a wren, called the King, used to be carried about on Twelfth Day in a box with glass windows surmounted by a wheel, from which hung various coloured ribbons. The men and boys who carried it from house to house sang songs, in one of which they wished joy, health, love, and peace to the inmates of the house.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-949" id="noteref-5-2-949" epub:type="noteref">949</a></p>
					<p>In the first half of the nineteenth century similar customs were still observed in various parts of the south of France. Thus at Carcassone, every year on the first Sunday of December the young people of the street Saint Jean used to go out of the town armed with sticks, with which they beat the bushes, looking for wrens. The first to strike down one of these birds was proclaimed King. Then they returned to the town in procession, headed by the King, who carried the wren on a pole. On the evening of the last day of the year the King and all who had hunted the wren marched through the streets of the town to the light of torches, with drums beating and fifes playing in front of them. At the door of every house they stopped, and one of them wrote with chalk on the door <i xml:lang="fr">vive le roi!</i> with the number of the year which was about to begin. On the morning of Twelfth Day the King again marched in procession with great pomp, wearing a crown and a blue mantle and carrying a sceptre. In front of him was borne the wren fastened to the top of a pole, which was adorned with a verdant wreath of olive, of oak, and sometimes of mistletoe grown on an oak. After hearing high mass in the parish church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Vincent, surrounded by his officers and guards, the King visited the bishop, the mayor, the magistrates, and the chief inhabitants, collecting money to defray the expenses of the royal banquet which took place in the evening and wound up with a dance.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-950" id="noteref-5-2-950" epub:type="noteref">950</a> At Entraigues men and boys used to hunt the wren on Christmas Eve. When they caught one alive they presented it to the priest, who, after the midnight mass, set the bird free in the church. At Mirabeau the priest blessed the bird. If the men failed to catch a wren and the women succeeded in doing so, the women had the right to mock and insult the men, and to blacken their faces with mud and soot, when they caught them.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-951" id="noteref-5-2-951" epub:type="noteref">951</a> At La Ciotat, near Marseilles, a large body of men armed with swords and pistols used to hunt the wren every year about the end of December. When a wren was caught it was hung on the middle of a pole, which two men carried, as if it were a heavy burden. Thus they paraded round the town; the bird was weighed in a great pair of scales; and then the company sat down to table and made merry.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-952" id="noteref-5-2-952" epub:type="noteref">952</a></p>
					<p>The parallelism between this custom of “hunting the wren” and some of those which we have considered, especially the Gilyak procession with the bear, and the Indian one with the snake, seems too close to allow us to doubt that they all belong to the same circle of ideas. The worshipful animal is killed with special solemnity once a year; and before or immediately after death he is promenaded from door to door, that each of his worshippers may receive a portion of the divine virtues that are supposed to emanate from the dead or dying god. Religious processions of this sort must have had a great place in the ritual of European peoples in prehistoric times, if we may judge from the numerous traces of them which have survived in folk-custom. A well-preserved specimen is the following, which lasted in the Highlands of Scotland and in <abbr>St.</abbr> Kilda down at least to the latter half of the eighteenth century. It was described to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Johnson in the island of Coll.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-953" id="noteref-5-2-953" epub:type="noteref">953</a> Another description of it runs as follows: “On the evening before New Year’s Day it is usual for the cowherd and the young people to meet together, and one of them is covered with a cow’s hide. The rest of the company are provided with staves, to the end of which bits of raw hide are tied. The person covered with the hide runs thrice round the dwelling-house, <i xml:lang="gd">deiseil</i>⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> according to the course of the sun; the rest pursue, beating the hide with their staves, and crying [here follows the Gaelic], ‘Let us raise the noise louder and louder; let us beat the hide.’ They then come to the door of each dwelling-house, and one of them repeats some verses composed for the purpose. When admission is granted, one of them pronounces within the threshold the <i xml:lang="gd">beannachadthurlair</i>, or verses by which he pretends to draw down a blessing upon the whole family [here follows the Gaelic], ‘May God bless the house and all that belongs to it, cattle, stones, and timber! In plenty of meat, of bed and body-clothes, and health of men, may it ever abound!’ Then each burns in the fire a little of the bit of hide which is tied to the end of the staff. It is applied to the nose of every person and domestic animal that belongs to the house. This, they imagine, will tend much to secure them from diseases and other misfortunes during the ensuing year. The whole of the ceremony is called <i xml:lang="gd">colluinn</i>, from the great noise which the hide makes. It is the principal remnant of superstition among the inhabitants of <abbr>St.</abbr> Kilda.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-954" id="noteref-5-2-954" epub:type="noteref">954</a></p>
					<p>A more recent writer has described the old Highland custom as follows. Towards evening on the last day of the year, or Hogmanay, as the day is called in Scotland, “men began to gather and boys ran about shouting and laughing, playing shinty, and rolling ‘pigs of snow’ (<i xml:lang="gd">mucan sneachda</i>), <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> large snowballs. The hide of the mart or winter cow (<i xml:lang="gd">seiche a mhairt gheamhraidh</i>) was wrapped round the head of one of the men, and he made off, followed by the rest, belabouring the hide, which made a noise like a drum, with switches. The disorderly procession went three times <i xml:lang="gd">deiseal</i>, according to the course of the sun (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> keeping the house on the right hand) round each house in the village, striking the walls and shouting on coming to a door:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>‘The <i>calluinn</i> of the yellow bag of hide,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Strike the skin (upon the wall)</span>
							<br/>
							<span>An old wife in the graveyard,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>An old wife in the corner,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Another old wife beside the fire,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A pointed stick in her two eyes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A pointed stick in her stomach,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Let me in, open this.’</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>“Before this request was complied with, each of the revellers had to repeat a rhyme, called <i>Rann Calluinn</i> (<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> a Christmas rhyme), though, as might be expected when the door opened for one, several pushed their way in, till it was ultimately left open for all. On entering each of the party was offered refreshments, oatmeal bread, cheese, flesh, and a dram of whisky. Their leader gave to the goodman of the house that indispensable adjunct of the evening’s mummeries, the <i xml:lang="gd">Caisein-uchd</i>, the breast-stripe of a sheep wrapped round the point of a shinty stick. This was then singed in the fire (<i xml:lang="gd">teallach</i>), put three times with the right-hand turn (<i xml:lang="gd">deiseal</i>) round the family, and held to the noses of all. Not a drop of drink was given till this ceremony was performed. The <i xml:lang="gd">Caisein-uchd</i> was also made of the breast-stripe or tail of a deer, sheep, or goat, and as many as chose had one with them.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-955" id="noteref-5-2-955" epub:type="noteref">955</a> Another writer who gives a similar account of the ceremony and of the verses sung by the performers, tells us that the intention of putting the burnt sheepskin to the noses of the people was to protect them against witchcraft and every infection.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-956" id="noteref-5-2-956" epub:type="noteref">956</a> The explanation, which is doubtless correct, reminds us of the extraordinarily persistent hold which the belief in sorcery and witchcraft has retained on the minds of the European peasantry. Formerly, perhaps, pieces of the cowhide in which the man was clad were singed and put to the noses of the people, just as in the Isle of Man a feather of the wren used to be given to each household. Similarly, as we have seen, the human victim whom the Khonds slew as a divinity was taken from house to house, and everyone strove to obtain a relic of his sacred person.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-957" id="noteref-5-2-957" epub:type="noteref">957</a> Such customs are only another form of that communion with the deity which is attained most completely by eating the body and drinking the blood of the god.</p>
				</section>
				<section id="chapter-5-17-3" epub:type="division">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">III</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">The Rites of Plough Monday</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>In the “hunting of the wren,” and the procession with the man clad in a cowskin, there is nothing to show that the customs in question have any relation to agriculture. So far as appears, they may date from a time before the invention of husbandry when animals were revered as divine in themselves, not merely as divine because they embodied the corn-spirit; and the analogy of the Gilyak procession of the bear and the Indian procession of the snake is in favour of assigning the corresponding European customs to this very early date. On the other hand, there are certain European processions of animals, or of men disguised as animals, which may perhaps be purely agricultural in their origin; in other words, the animals which figure in them may have been from the first nothing but representatives of the corn-spirit conceived in animal shape. Examples of such dramatic and at the same time religious rites have been collected by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, who says of them in general: “Not only on the harvest field and on the threshing-floor but also quite apart from them people loved to represent the corn-spirit dramatically, especially in solemn processions in spring and about the winter solstice, whereby they meant to depict the return of the beneficent powers of summer to the desolate realm of nature.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-958" id="noteref-5-2-958" epub:type="noteref">958</a> Thus, for example, in country districts of Bohemia it is, or used to be, customary during the last days of the Carnival for young men to go about in procession from house to house collecting gratuities. Usually a man or boy is swathed from head to foot in peas-straw and wrapt round in straw-ropes: thus attired he goes by the name of the Shrovetide or Carnival Bear (<i xml:lang="de">Fastnachtsbär</i>) and is led from house to house to the accompaniment of music and singing. In every house he dances with the girls, the maids, and the housewife herself, and drinks to the health of the good man, the good wife, and the girls. For this performance the mummer is regaled with food by the good wife, while the good man puts money in his box. When the mummers have gone the round of the village, they betake themselves to the alehouse, whither also all the peasants repair with their wives; “for at Shrovetide, but especially on Shrove Tuesday, everyone must dance, if the flax, the vegetables, and the corn are to thrive; and the more and the higher they dance, the greater the blessing which the people expect to crown their exertions.” In the Leitmeritz district the Shrovetide Bear, besides being wrapt in straw, sometimes wears a bear’s mask to emphasise his resemblance to the animal. In the Czech villages the housewives pluck the peas-straw and other straw from the Shrovetide Bear and put it in the nests of their geese, believing that the geese will lay more eggs and hatch their broods better for the addition of this straw to their nests. For a similar purpose in the Saaz district the women put the straw of the Shrovetide Bear in the nests of their hens.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-959" id="noteref-5-2-959" epub:type="noteref">959</a> In these customs the dancing for the express purpose of making the crops grow high,<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-960" id="noteref-5-2-960" epub:type="noteref">960</a> and the use of the straw to make the geese and hens lay more eggs, sufficiently prove that the Shrovetide Bear is conceived to represent the spirit of fertility both animal and vegetable; and we may reasonably conjecture that the dances of the mummer with the women and girls are especially intended to convey to them the fertilising powers of the spirit whom the mummer personates.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-961" id="noteref-5-2-961" epub:type="noteref">961</a></p>
					<p>In some parts of Bohemia the straw-clad man in these Shrovetide processions is called, not the Bear, but the Oats-goat, and he wears horns on his head to give point to the name.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-962" id="noteref-5-2-962" epub:type="noteref">962</a> These different names and disguises indicate that in some places the corn-spirit is conceived as a bear and in others as a goat. Many examples of the conception of the corn-spirit as a goat have already been cited;<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-963" id="noteref-5-2-963" epub:type="noteref">963</a> the conception of him as a bear seems to be less common. In the neighbourhood of Gniewkowo, in Prussian Lithuania, the two ideas are combined, for on Twelfth Day a man wrapt in peas-straw to represent a Bear and another wrapt in oats-straw to represent a Goat go together about the village; they imitate the actions of the two animals and perform dances, for which they receive a present in every house.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-964" id="noteref-5-2-964" epub:type="noteref">964</a> At Marburg in Steiermark the corn-spirit figures now as a wolf and now as a bear. The man who gave the last stroke at threshing is called the Wolf. All the other men flee from the barn, and wait till the Wolf comes forth; whereupon they pounce on him, wrap him in straw to resemble a wolf, and so lead him about the village. He keeps the name of Wolf till Christmas, when he is wrapt in a goat’s skin and led from house to house as a Peas-bear at the end of a rope.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-965" id="noteref-5-2-965" epub:type="noteref">965</a> In this custom the dressing of the mummer in a goat’s skin seems to mark him out as the representative of a goat; so that here the mythical fancy of the people apparently hesitates between a goat, a bear, and a wolf as the proper embodiment of the corn-spirit. In Scandinavia the conception of the spirit as a goat who appears at Christmas (<i>Julbuck</i>) appears to be common. Thus, for example, in Bergslagshärad (Sweden) it used to be customary at Christmas to lead about a man completely wrapt in corn-straw and wearing a goat’s horns on his head: he personated the Yule-goat.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-966" id="noteref-5-2-966" epub:type="noteref">966</a> In some parts of Sweden a regular feature of the little Christmas drama is a pretence of slaughtering the Yule-goat, who, however, comes to life again. The actor, hidden by a coverlet made of skins and wearing a pair of formidable horns, is led into the room by two men, who make believe to slaughter him, while they sing verses referring to the mantles of various colours, red, blue, white, and yellow, which they laid on him, one after the other. At the conclusion of the song, the Yule-goat, after feigning death, jumps up and skips about to the amusement of the spectators.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-967" id="noteref-5-2-967" epub:type="noteref">967</a> In Willstad after supper on Christmas evening, while the people are dancing “the angel dance” for the sake of ensuring a good crop of flax, some long stalks of the Yule straw, either of wheat or rye, are made up into the likeness of a goat, which is thrown among the dancers with the cry, “Catch the Yule-goat!” The custom in Dalarne is similar, except that there the straw-animal goes by the name of the Yule-ram.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-968" id="noteref-5-2-968" epub:type="noteref">968</a> In these customs the identification of the Yule-goat or the Yule-ram with the corn-spirit seems unmistakable. As if to clinch the argument it is customary in Denmark and Sweden to bake cakes of fine meal at Christmas in the form of goats, rams, or boars. These are called Yule-goats, Yule-rams, or Yule-boars; they are often made out of the last sheaf of corn at harvest and kept till sowing-time, when they are partly mixed with the seed-corn and partly eaten by the people and the plough-oxen in the hope thereby of securing a good harvest.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-969" id="noteref-5-2-969" epub:type="noteref">969</a> It would seem scarcely possible to represent the identification of the corn-spirit with an animal, whether goat, ram, or boar, more graphically; for the last corn cut at harvest is regularly supposed to house the corn-spirit, who is accordingly caught, kept through the winter in the shape of an animal, and then mixed with the seed in spring to quicken the grain before it is committed to the ground. Examples of the corn-spirit conceived as a wether and a boar have met us in a preceding part of this work.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-970" id="noteref-5-2-970" epub:type="noteref">970</a> The pretence of killing the Yule-goat and bringing him to life again was probably in origin a magical rite to ensure the rebirth of the corn-spirit in spring.</p>
					<p>In England a custom like some of the preceding still prevails at Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire on the Tuesday after Plough Monday, as I learn from an obliging communication of Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. C.</abbr> Moore Smith of Sheffield University. He writes: “When I was at Whittlesey yesterday I had the pleasure of meeting a ‘Straw-bear,’ if not two, in the street. I had not been at Whittlesey on the day for nearly forty years, and feared the custom had died out. In my boyhood the Straw-bear was a man completely swathed in straw, led by a string by another and made to dance in front of people’s houses, in return for which money was expected. This always took place on the Tuesday following Plough-Monday. Yesterday the Straw-bear was a boy, and I saw no dancing. Otherwise there was no change.”<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-971" id="noteref-5-2-971" epub:type="noteref">971</a></p>
					<p>A comparison of this English custom with the similar Continental customs which have been described above, raises a presumption that the Straw-bear, who is thus led about from house to house, represents the corn-spirit bestowing his blessing on every homestead in the village. This interpretation is strongly confirmed by the date at which the ceremony takes place. For the date is the day after Plough Monday, and it can hardly be doubted that the old popular celebration of Plough Monday has a direct reference to agriculture. Plough Monday is the first Monday of January after Twelfth Day. On that day it used to be the custom in various parts of England for a band of sturdy swains to drag a gaily decorated plough from house to house and village to village, collecting contributions which were afterwards spent in rustic revelry at a tavern. The men who drew the plough were called Plough Bullocks; they wore their shirts over their coats, and bunches of ribbons flaunted from their hats and persons. Among them there was always one who personated a much bedizened old woman called Bessy; under his gown he formerly had a bullock’s tail fastened to him behind, but this appendage was afterwards discarded. He skipped, danced and cut capers, and carried a money-box soliciting contributions from the onlookers. Some of the band, in addition to their ribbons, “also wore small bunches of corn in their hats, from which the wheat was soon shaken out by the ungainly jumping which they called dancing. Occasionally, if the winter was severe, the procession was joined by threshers carrying their flails, reapers bearing their sickles, and carters with their long whips, which they were ever cracking to add to the noise, while even the smith and the miller were among the number, for the one sharpened the ploughshares and the other ground the corn; and Bessy rattled his box and danced so high that he showed his worsted stockings and corduroy breeches; and very often, if there was a thaw, tucked up his gown skirts under his waistcoat, and shook the bonnet off his head, and disarranged the long ringlets that ought to have concealed his whiskers.” Sometimes among the mummers there was a Fool, who wore the skin of a calf with the tail hanging down behind, and wielded a stick with an inflated bladder tied to it, which he applied with rude vigour to the heads and shoulders of the human team. Another mummer generally wore a fox’s skin in the form of a hood with the tail dangling on his back. If any churl refused to contribute to the money-box, the plough-bullocks put their shoulders to the plough and ploughed up the ground in front of his door.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-972" id="noteref-5-2-972" epub:type="noteref">972</a></p>
					<p>The clue to the meaning of these curious rites is probably furnished by the dances or rather jumps of the men who wore bunches of corn in their hats. When we remember how often on the Continent about the same time of year the peasants dance and jump for the express purpose of making the crops grow tall, we may conjecture with some probability that the intention of the dancers on Plough Monday was similar; the original notion, we may suppose, was that the corn would grow that year just as high as the dancers leaped. If that was so, we need not wonder at the agility displayed on these occasions by the yokels in general and by Bessy in particular. What stronger incentive could they have to exert themselves than the belief that the higher they leaped into the air the higher would sprout the cornstalks? In short, the whole ceremony was probably a magical rite intended to procure a good crop. The principle on which it rested was the familiar one of homoeopathic or imitative magic: by mimicking the act of ploughing and the growth of the corn the mummers hoped to ensure the success of the real ploughing, which was soon to take place.</p>
					<p>If such was the real meaning of the ritual of Plough Monday, we may the more confidently assume that the Straw-bear who makes his appearance at Whittlesey in Cambridgeshire on the day after Plough Monday represents indeed the corn-spirit. What could be more appropriate than for that beneficent being to manifest himself from house to house the very day after a magical ceremony had been performed to quicken the growth of the corn?</p>
					<p>The foregoing interpretation of the rites observed in England on Plough Monday tallies well with the explanation which I have given of the very similar rites annually performed at the end of the Carnival in Thrace.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-973" id="noteref-5-2-973" epub:type="noteref">973</a> The mock ploughing is probably practised for the same purpose in both cases, and what that purpose is may be safely inferred from the act of sowing and the offering of prayers for abundant crops which accompany and explain the Thracian ceremony. It deserves to be noted that ceremonies of the same sort and closely resembling those of Plough Monday are not confined to the Greek villages of Thrace but are observed also by the Bulgarians of that province at the same time, namely, on the Monday of the last week in Carnival. Thus at Malko-Tirnovsko, in the district of Adrianople, a procession of mummers goes through the streets on that day. The principal personages in it bear the names of the <i>Kuker</i> and <i>Kukerica</i>. The <i>Kuker</i> is a man clad in a goatskin. His face is blackened with soot and he wears on his head a high shaggy hat made of an entire skin. Bells jingle at his girdle, and in his hand he carries a club. The <i>Kukerica</i>, who sometimes goes by the name of <i>Baba</i>, that is, “Old Woman,” is a man disguised in petticoats with his face blackened. Other figures in the procession are young men dressed as girls, and girls dressed as men and wearing masks. Bears are represented by dogs wrapt in bearskins. A king, a judge, and other officials are personated by other mummers; they hold a mock court and those whom they condemn receive a bastinado. Some of the maskers carry clubs; it is their duty to beat all who fall into their hands and to levy contributions from them. The play and gestures of the <i>Kuker</i> and <i>Kukerica</i> are wanton and lascivious: the songs and cries addressed to the <i>Kuker</i> are also very cynical. Towards evening two of the company are yoked to a plough, and the <i>Kuker</i> ploughs a few furrows, which he thereupon sows with corn. After sunset he puts off his disguise, is paid for his trouble, and carouses with his fellows. The people believe that the man who plays the part of <i>Kuker</i> commits a deadly sin, and the priests make vain efforts to abolish the custom. At the village of Kuria, in the district of Losengrad, the custom is in general the same, but there are some significant variations. The money collected by the mummers is used to buy wine, which is distributed among all the villagers at a banquet in the evening. On this occasion a cake in which an old coin has been baked is produced by the <i>Kuker</i>, broken into bits, and so divided among all present. If the bit with the coin in it falls to a farmer, then the crops will be good that year; but if it falls to a herdsman, then the cattle will thrive. Finally, the <i>Kuker</i> ploughs a small patch of ground, “bending his body to right and left in order to indicate symbolically the ears of corn bending under the weight of the grain.” The others lay hold of the man with whom the coin was found, bind him by the feet, and drag him over the land that has just been ploughed.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-974" id="noteref-5-2-974" epub:type="noteref">974</a> In these observances the intention of promoting the fertility of the ground is unmistakable; the ploughman’s imitation of the cornstalks bending under their own weight is a simple case of homoeopathic or imitative magic, while the omens drawn from the occupation of the person who obtains the piece of cake with the coin in it indicate that the ceremony is designed to quicken the herds as well as the crops. We can hardly doubt that the same serious motive underlies the seemingly wanton gestures of the principal actors and explains the loose character of the songs and words which accompany the ceremony. Nor is it hard to divine the reason for dragging over the fresh furrows the man who is lucky enough to get the coin in the cake. He is probably looked on as an embodiment of the corn-spirit, and in that character is compelled to fertilise the ground by bodily contact with the newly-ploughed earth.</p>
					<p>Similar customs are observed at the Carnival not only by Bulgarian peasants in Thrace but also here and there in Bulgaria itself. In that country the leading personage of the masquerade is the <i>Baba</i>, that is, the Old Woman or Mother. The part is played by a man in woman’s clothes; she, or rather he, wears no mask, but in many villages she carries a spindle with which she spins. The <i>Kuker</i> and the <i>Kukerica</i> also figure in the performance, but they are subordinate to the Old Woman or Mother. Their costume varies in different villages. Usually they are clad in skins with a girdle of lime-tree bark and five or six bells fastened to it; on their back they wear a hump made up of rags. But the principal feature in their attire consists of their masks, which represent the heads of animals and men in fantastic combinations, such as the horned head of a man or a bird, the head of a ram, a bull, and so on. Much labour is spent on the manufacture of these masks. Early in the morning of Cheese Monday (the Monday of the last week in Carnival) the mummers go about the village levying contributions. Towards noon they form a procession and go from house to house. In every house they dance a round dance, while the Old Woman spins. It is believed that if any householder contrives to carry off the Old Woman and secrete her, a blessing and prosperity will enter into his dwelling; but the maskers defend the Old Woman stoutly against all such attempts of individuals to appropriate her beneficent presence. After the dance the mummers receive gifts of money, eggs, meal, and so on. Towards evening a round dance is danced in the village square, and there the Old Woman yokes the <i>Kuker</i> and <i>Kukerica</i> to a plough, ploughs with it a small piece of ground, and sows the ground with corn. Next day the performers reassemble, sell the presents they had collected, and with the produce hold a feast in the house of the Old Woman. It is supposed that if strange maskers make their way into a village, fertility will be drawn away to the village from which they have come; hence the villagers resist an inroad of strange maskers at any price. In general the people believe that the masquerade is performed for the purpose of increasing the luck and fertility of the village.<a href="endnotes-5-2.xhtml#note-5-2-975" id="noteref-5-2-975" epub:type="noteref">975</a></p>
					<p>In these Bulgarian rites, accordingly, we are not left to form conjectures as to the intention with which they are practised; that intention is plainly avowed, and it is no other than the one which we have inferred for the similar rites observed in Thrace at the same season and in England on Plough Monday. In all these cases it is reasonable to suppose that the real aim of the ceremonial ploughing and sowing of the ground is thereby, on the principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic, to ensure the growth of the corn on all the fields of the community. Perhaps we may go a step further and suggest that in the Bulgarian Old Woman or Mother, who guides the plough and sows the seed, and whose presence is believed to bring a blessing to any household that can contrive to appropriate her, we have the rustic prototype of Demeter, the Corn-Mother, who in the likeness of an Old Woman brought a blessing to the house of Celeus, king of Eleusis, and restored their lost fertility to the fallow Eleusinian fields. And in the pair of mummers, man and woman, who draw the plough, may we not discern the rude originals of Pluto and Persephone? If that is so, the gods of Greece are not wholly dead; they still hide their diminished heads in the cottages of the peasantry, to come forth on sunshine holidays and parade, with a simple but expressive pageantry, among a gazing crowd of rustics, at the very moment of the year when their help is most wanted by the husbandman.</p>
					<p>Be that as it may, these rites still practised by the peasantry at opposite ends of Europe, no doubt date from an extremely early age in the history of agriculture. They are probably far older than Christianity, older even than those highly developed forms of Greek religion with which ancient writers and artists have made us familiar, but which have been for so many centuries a thing of the past. Thus it happens that, while the fine flower of the religious consciousness in myth, ritual, and art is fleeting and evanescent, its simpler forms are comparatively stable and permanent, being rooted deep in those principles of common minds which bid fair to outlive all the splendid but transient creations of genius. It may be that the elaborate theologies, the solemn rites, the stately temples, which now attract the reverence or the wonder of mankind, are destined themselves to pass away like “all Olympus’ faded hierarchy,” and that simple folk will still cherish the simple faiths of their nameless and dateless forefathers, will still believe in witches and fairies, in ghosts and hobgoblins, will still mumble the old spells and make the old magic passes, when the muezzin shall have ceased to call the faithful to prayer from the minarets of <abbr>St.</abbr> Sophia, and when the worshippers shall gather no more in the long-drawn aisles of Nôtre Dame and under the dome of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
