<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="chapter">
				<span class="pageno" id="Page_207">207</span>
				<h2 class="c002" id="chap15">CHAPTER XV<br/>
				THE FIRE-DRILL</h2>
			</div>
			<p class="c003"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Mode of rekindling the Vestal fire at Rome by means of the fire-drill.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> In historical times, whenever the Vestal fire at Rome happened to be extinguished, the virgins were beaten by the pontiff; after which it was their custom, apparently with the aid of the pontiff, to rekindle the fire by drilling a hole in a board of lucky wood till a flame was elicited by friction. The new fire thus obtained was carried into the temple of Vesta by one of the virgins in a bronze sieve.<a id="r683"/><a class="c005" href="#f683"><sup>[683]</sup></a> As this mode of producing fire is one of the most primitive known to man, and has been commonly employed by many savage <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Use of the fire-drill by savages.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> tribes down to modern times,<a id="r684"/><a class="c005" href="#f684"><sup>[684]</sup></a> we need have no difficulty in <span class="pageno" id="Page_208">208</span>believing that its use in the worship of Vesta was a survival from prehistoric ages, and that whenever the fire on the hearth of the Latin kings went out it was regularly relit in the same fashion. In its simplest form the fire-drill, as the apparatus has been appropriately named by Professor E. B. Tylor, consists of two sticks, the one furnished with a point and the other with a hole. The point of the one stick is inserted into the hole of the other, which is laid flat on the ground, while the operator holds the pointed stick upright in position and twirls it rapidly between his hands till the rubbing of the two sticks against each other produces sparks and at last a flame.</p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Many savages regard the two sticks of the fire-drill as male and female, and the rubbing of the two together as a sexual union.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> Many savages see in this operation a resemblance to the union of the sexes, and have accordingly named the pointed stick the man and the holed stick the woman. Thus we are told that among the Thompson Indians of British Columbia “fire was obtained by means of the fire-drill, which consisted of two dried sticks, each over a foot in length, and rounded off to less than an inch in diameter. One stick was sharpened at one end; while the other was marked with a couple of notches close to each other—one on the side, and the other on top. The sharpened end of the first stick was placed in the top notch of the other stick, and turned rapidly between the straightened palms of both hands. The heat thus produced by the friction of the sticks caused sparks to fall down the side notch upon tinder placed underneath, which, when it commenced to smoke, was taken in the hands, and blown upon until fanned into a flame. The tinder was dry grass, the shredded dry bark of the sagebrush, or cedar-bark. The sharpened stick was called the ‘man,’ and was made of black-pine root, tops of young yellow pine, heart of yellow-pine cones, service-berry wood, etc. The notched stick was called the ‘woman,’ and was generally made of poplar-root. However, many kinds of wood were used for this purpose. When hot ashes or a spark fell upon the tinder, they said, ‘The woman has given birth.’”<a id="r685"/><a class="c005" href="#f685"><sup>[685]</sup></a> The Hopi Indians kindle fire ceremonially by the friction of two sticks, which are <span class="pageno" id="Page_209">209</span>regarded respectively as male and female. The female stick has a notch in it and is laid flat on the floor; the point of the male stick is inserted in the notch of the female stick and is made to revolve rapidly by twirling the stick between the hands. Pollen is added as a male symbol, and the spark is caught in a tinder of shredded cedar bark.<a id="r686"/><a class="c005" href="#f686"><sup>[686]</sup></a> The Urabunna tribe of Central Australia, who also make fire by means of the fire-drill, call the upright piece “the child-stick,” while they give to the horizontal or notched piece the name of “the mother-stick” or “the mother of the fire.”<a id="r687"/><a class="c005" href="#f687"><sup>[687]</sup></a> So in the Murray Islands, Torres Straits, the upright stick is called the child (<i>werem</i>), and the horizontal stick the mother (<i>apu</i>). In Mabuiag, Torres Straits, on the other hand, the vertical stick is known as the male organ (<i>ini</i>), and the horizontal stick as the hole (<i>sakai</i>).<a id="r688"/><a class="c005" href="#f688"><sup>[688]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The fire-drill among the Arabs.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> “The ancient Bedouins kindled fire by means of the fire-drill, which was composed of a horizontal stick, the <i>zenda</i>, and an upright stick, the <i>zend</i>. The science of language furnishes us with many parallels for this mode of regarding the two parts as male and female; the two parts of the lock are distinguished in like manner; the spark is then the child, <i>tifl</i>; compare also our German <i>Schraubenmutter</i>, <i>Muttergewinde</i>. The sticks for making fire by friction are not taken from the same tree; on the contrary, they choose one as hard and tough as possible, and the other soft, which allows the hard one to fit into it more easily and catches fire the quicker on account of its loose texture. The soft wood was naturally the horizontal stick, the <i>zenda</i>, which the Arabs made out of <i>Calotropis procera</i> (<i>’oshar</i>), while for the upright stick they used a hard branch of <i>markh</i>.”<a id="r689"/><a class="c005" href="#f689"><sup>[689]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_210">210</span><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The fire-drill in Africa.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> The Ngumbu of South Cameroons, in West Africa, formerly made fire by rubbing two sticks against each other. Of the sticks the one, called the male <i>nschio</i>, was put into a hole of the other, which was called the female <i>nschio</i>.<a id="r690"/><a class="c005" href="#f690"><sup>[690]</sup></a> In East Africa the Masai men make fire by drilling a hole in a flat piece of wood with a hard pointed stick. They say that the hard pointed stick is a man and that the flat piece of wood is his wife. The former is cut from <i>Ficus sycomorus</i> and <i>Ekebergia sp.</i>, the latter from any fibrous tree, such as <i>Kigelia africana</i>, <i>Cordia ovalis</i>, or <i>Acacia albida</i>. The women get their fire from the one which has thus been kindled by the men.<a id="r691"/><a class="c005" href="#f691"><sup>[691]</sup></a> The Nandi similarly produce fire by rapidly drilling a hard pointed stick into a small hole in a flat piece of soft wood. The hard stick is called the male (<i>kirkit</i>) and the piece of soft wood the female (<i>kôket</i>). Among the Nandi, as apparently among the Masai, fire-making is an exclusive privilege of the men of the tribe.<a id="r692"/><a class="c005" href="#f692"><sup>[692]</sup></a> The Baganda of Central Africa also made fire by means of the fire-drill; they called the upright stick the male, and the horizontal stick the female.<a id="r693"/><a class="c005" href="#f693"><sup>[693]</sup></a> Among the Bantu tribes of south-eastern Africa, “when the native Africans use special fire, either in connection with sacrifice or the festival of first-fruits, it is produced by a doctor, and in the following manner:—Two sticks, made of the <i>Uzwati</i> tree, and called the ‘husband and wife,’ are given to him by the chief. These sticks are prepared by the magicians, and are the exclusive property of the chief, the ‘wife’ being the shorter of the two. The doctor cuts a piece off each stick, and proceeds to kindle fire in the usual manner, by revolving the one rapidly between the palms of his hands, while its end rests in a small hollow dug in the side of the other. After he has <span class="pageno" id="Page_211">211</span>obtained fire, he gives it to his attendant, who gets the pots in order, and everything ready for cooking the newly-reaped fruits. The sticks are handed back to the chief by the doctor—no other hand must touch them—and put away till they are required next season. They are regarded as in a measure sacred, and no one, except the chief’s personal servant, may go to the side of the hut where they are kept. After being repeatedly used for fire-making, the doctor disposes of what remains, and new ones are made and consecrated by the magician. A special pot is used for the preparation of the feast, and no other than it may be set on a fire produced from the ‘husband and wife.’ When the feast is over, the fire is carefully extinguished, and the pot placed along with the sticks, where it remains untouched for another year.”<a id="r694"/><a class="c005" href="#f694"><sup>[694]</sup></a> But even for the purposes of daily life these tribes still kindle fire in this manner, if they happen to be without matches. “A native takes two special sticks, made of a light wood. One of these he points: this is called the male stick. He then makes a conical hole in the centre of the other stick, which is called the female. Placing the female stick on the ground, he holds it firmly by his feet—a native finds no difficulty in this, as he can easily pick things off the ground with his toes if his hands are full. He then places the pointed stick into the conical hole, and slowly twirls the male stick between his hands. He does this while using a good deal of pressure, and the wood becomes powdered, lying round the revolving point in a little heap of dust. When he thinks he has made sufficient of the wood dust, he twirls the stick very fast, and in a moment the powder bursts into flame, which he uses to set fire to some dried grass.”<a id="r695"/><a class="c005" href="#f695"><sup>[695]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Fire-customs of the Herero.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> The Damaras or Herero of Damaraland, in south-western Africa, maintain sacred fires in their villages, and their customs and beliefs in this respect present a close resemblance to the Roman worship of Vesta. Fortunately the Herero fire-worship has been described by a number of independent witnesses, and as their accounts agree substantially with each other, we may assume that they are <span class="pageno" id="Page_212">212</span>correct. The people are a tall, finely-built race of nomadic herdsmen belonging to the Bantu stock, who seem to have migrated into their present country from the north and east about a hundred and fifty or two hundred years ago. The desert character of the country and its seclusion from the outer world long combined to preserve the primitive manners of the inhabitants.<a id="r696"/><a class="c005" href="#f696"><sup>[696]</sup></a> In their native state the Herero are a purely pastoral people, possessing <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The Herero a pastoral people.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> immense herds of cattle and flocks of sheep and goats, which are the pride and joy of their hearts, almost their idols. They subsist chiefly on the milk of their herds, which they commonly drink sour. Of the flesh they make but little use, for they seldom kill any of their cattle, and never a cow, a calf, or a lamb. Even oxen and weathers are only slaughtered on solemn and festal occasions, such as visits, burials, and the like. Such slaughter is a great event in a village, and young and old flock from far and near to partake of the meat.<a id="r697"/><a class="c005" href="#f697"><sup>[697]</sup></a> Their huts are of a round <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Huts and villages of the Herero.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> beehive shape, about ten feet in diameter. The framework consists of stout branches, of which the lower ends are rammed into the ground, while the upper ends are bent together and tied with bark. A village is composed of a number of these round huts arranged in a circle about the calves’ pen as a centre and surrounded by an artificial hedge of thorn-bushes.<a id="r698"/><a class="c005" href="#f698"><sup>[698]</sup></a> At night the cattle are driven in through <span class="pageno" id="Page_213">213</span>the hedge and take up their quarters in the open space round the calves’ pen.<a id="r699"/><a class="c005" href="#f699"><sup>[699]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Sacred fire of the Herero village maintained in or before the hut of the chief’s principal wife.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> The hut of the great or principal wife of the chief, built and furnished in a more elaborate style than the rest, regularly stands to the east of the calves’ pen, in the direction of sunrise, so that from its position we can always learn approximately the season of the year when the village was founded. The chief or headman of the village has no special hut of his own; he passes the day in the hut of the great wife, and the night commonly in one of the huts of his other wives in the northern semicircle. Between the house of the great wife and the calves’ pen, but somewhat nearer to the pen, is a large heap of ashes on which, in good weather, a small, faintly glimmering fire may be seen to burn at any time of the day. The heap of ashes is the sacred hearth (<i>okuruo</i>); the fire is the holy fire (<i>omurangere</i> or <i>omurangerero</i>) of the village. The open space between the sacred hearth and the house of the great wife is known as the holy ground or the holy house (<i>otyizero</i>).<a id="r700"/><a class="c005" href="#f700"><sup>[700]</sup></a> Betwixt the hearth and the calves’ fold stands a great withered branch of the <i>omumborombonga</i> (<i>Combretum primigenum</i>), the sacred tree of the Herero, from which they believe that both they and their cattle <span class="pageno" id="Page_214">214</span>are descended. When a branch of this tree cannot be obtained its place is taken by a bough of the <i>omwapu</i> tree (<i>Grevia spec.</i>)<a id="r701"/><a class="c005" href="#f701"><sup>[701]</sup></a> At night and in rainy weather the fire is transferred to the hut of the great wife, where it is carefully kept alight.<a id="r702"/><a class="c005" href="#f702"><sup>[702]</sup></a> According to another account, the fire is regularly preserved in the house, and a brand is only brought out into the open air when the cattle are being milked at morning and evening in order that in presence of the fire the cow may be healthy and give much milk.<a id="r703"/><a class="c005" href="#f703"><sup>[703]</sup></a> The custom in this respect perhaps varies in different villages, and may be determined in some measure by the climate. The sacred fire is regarded as the centre of the village; from it at evening the people fetch a light to kindle the fire on their own hearths, for every householder has his own private hearth in front of his hut. At the holy hearth are kept the most sacred possessions of the tribe, to wit, the bundle of sticks which represent their ancestors; here sacrifices are offered and enchantments performed; here the flesh of the victims is cooked; here is the proper place of the chief; here the elders assemble in council, and judgment is given; here strangers are received and ambassadors entertained. At the banquets held on solemn occasions all may partake of the flesh, whether they be friends or foes; the stranger’s curse would rest on the churl who should refuse him his just share; and this curse the Herero dreads above everything because he believes its effect to be infallible. So great is the veneration felt by the natives for the sacred hearth, with its hallowed bough, that they dare not approach it without testifying the deepest respect. They take off their sandals, throw themselves on the ground, and pray their great ancestor (<i>Tate Mukuru</i>) to be gracious to them. The horns of the oxen slaughtered at festivals lie beside the hearth; the chief sits on the largest pair when he is engaged in performing his magical rites. Near the fire, too, is a stone on which none but the chief has the right to sit.<a id="r704"/><a class="c005" href="#f704"><sup>[704]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_215">215</span><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The sacred fire among the Herero is watched and fed by the chief’s eldest unmarried daughter, who performs other priestly duties.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> The duty of maintaining the sacred fire and preserving it from extinction is entrusted to the eldest unmarried daughter of the chief by his great wife; if he has no daughter, the task devolves on the unmarried girl who is next of kin to him. She bears the title of <i>ondangere</i>, derived from the name of the sacred fire (<i>omurangere</i>).<a id="r705"/><a class="c005" href="#f705"><sup>[705]</sup></a> Besides keeping up the fire she has other priestly functions to discharge. Before the men start on a dangerous expedition, she rubs the holy ashes on their foreheads.<a id="r706"/><a class="c005" href="#f706"><sup>[706]</sup></a> When a woman brings her new-born infant to the sacred hearth to receive its name, the maiden priestess or Vestal, as we may call her, sprinkles water on both mother and child.<a id="r707"/><a class="c005" href="#f707"><sup>[707]</sup></a> Every morning, when the cattle walk out of the fold, she besprinkles the fattest of them with a brush dipped in water.<a id="r708"/><a class="c005" href="#f708"><sup>[708]</sup></a> When an ox dies by accident at the village, she lays a piece of wood on its back, praying at the same time for long life, plenty of cattle, and so forth. Moreover, she ties a double knot in her apron for the dead beast, for a curse would follow if she neglected to do so.<a id="r709"/><a class="c005" href="#f709"><sup>[709]</sup></a> Lastly, when the site of the village is changed, the priestess walks at the head of the people and of the herds, carrying a firebrand from the old sacred hearth and taking the utmost care to keep it alight.<a id="r710"/><a class="c005" href="#f710"><sup>[710]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004">The chief or headman of the village is also the priest; <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The Herero chief acts as a priest.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> he alone may perform religious ceremonies except such as <span class="pageno" id="Page_216">216</span>fall within the province of the Vestal priestess, his daughter. In his capacity of priest he keeps the sacred bundle of sticks which represent the ancestors, and at sacrifices he offers meat to them that they may consecrate it. When the old village is abandoned, it is his duty to carry, like Aeneas quitting the ruins of Troy,<a id="r711"/><a class="c005" href="#f711"><sup>[711]</sup></a> these rude penates to the new home. However, it is deemed enough if he merely places the holy bundle on his back, and then hands it to a servant, who carries it for him. As a priest he introduces the newborn children to the spirits of the ancestors at the sacred hearth, and gives the infants their names; and as a priest he has a cow to himself, whose milk no one else may drink. This milk is kept in vessels which differ from the ordinary milk vessels, not only in shape and size, but also in being marked with the badge of his paternal clan. When a man goes forth from the village with his family and servants to herd the cattle on a distant pasture, or to found another village, he takes with him a burning brand from the sacred hearth wherewith to kindle the holy fire in his new home. By <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Fire taken from the chief’s hearth by the founder of a new village.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> doing so he acknowledges himself the vassal of the chief from whose hearth he took the fire. In this way a single village may give out swarm after swarm, till it has become the metropolis or capital of a whole group of villages, the inhabitants of which recognise the supremacy of the parent community, and regard themselves as all sitting round its sacred fire. It is thus that a village may grow into a tribe and its headman into a powerful chief, who, by means of marriage alliances and the adhesion of weaker rivals, may extend his sway over alien communities, and so gradually acquire the rank and authority of a king.<a id="r712"/><a class="c005" href="#f712"><sup>[712]</sup></a> The political evolution of the Herero has indeed stopped short of this final stage; but among the more advanced branches of the Bantu race, such as the Zulus and the Matabeles, it is possible that the kingship has developed along these lines.</p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="pageno" id="Page_217">217</span><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The combined office of chief and priest among the Herero descends in the male line.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> The possession of the sacred fire and of the ancestral sticks, carrying with it both political authority and priestly dignity, descends in the male line, and hence generally passes from father to son. In any case, whether the deceased had a son or not, the double office of chief and priest must always remain in his paternal clan (<i>oruzo</i>). If it should happen that the clan becomes extinct by his death, the <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>A chief’s sacred hearth abandoned for some time after his death.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> sacred fire is put out, the hearth destroyed, no brand is taken from it, and the sticks representing the ancestors are laid with the dead man in the grave. But should there be an heir, as usually happens, he takes a fire-brand from the sacred hearth and departs with all the people to seek a new home, abandoning the old village for years. In time, however, they return to the spot, rebuild the huts on the same sites, and inhabit them again. But in the interval none of the kinsmen of the deceased may approach the deserted village under pain of incurring the wrath of the ghost. When the return at last takes place, and the people have announced their arrival to the dead chief at his grave, which is generally in the cattle-pen, they make a new fire by the friction of the two sacred fire-sticks on the old hearth; for it is not lawful to bring with them a brand from their last settlement.<a id="r713"/><a class="c005" href="#f713"><sup>[713]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The sacred Herero fire rekindled by the fire-drill.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> If the sacred fire should go out through the neglect of the priestess, a sudden shower of rain, or any other accident, the Herero deem it a very evil omen. The whole tribe is immediately summoned and large offerings of cattle are made as an expiation. Then the fire is relit by means of the friction of two sacred fire-sticks, which have been handed down from father to son. Every chief possesses such fire-sticks, and keeps them tied up with the bundle of holy sticks that represent the ancestors. One of the fire-sticks is pointed, the other has a hole in the middle, and sometimes also a notch cut round it. In the notch some fungus or rotten wood is placed as tinder. The holed stick is held <span class="pageno" id="Page_218">218</span>fast on the ground by the knees of the operator, who inserts the point of the other stick in the hole and twirls it rapidly between the palms of his hands in the usual way. As soon as a spark is emitted it catches the tinder, which can then easily be blown up into a flame. Thus it is from the tinder, we are told, and not from the sticks, that the flame is elicited. In this fashion, if everything is very dry, as it generally is in Hereroland, the native gets fire in about a minute. The names applied to the two sticks indicate that the pointed stick (<i>ondume</i>) is regarded as male and the holed stick (<i>otyiya</i>) as female, and that the process of making fire by the friction of the two is compared to the intercourse of the sexes. As to the wood of which the fire-sticks are made accounts differ. According to Dr. H. Schinz the holed or female stick is of a soft wood, the pointed or male stick of a hard wood, generally of the <span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The male fire-stick made of the sacred <i>omumborombonga</i> tree.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> sacred <i>omumborombonga</i> tree (<i>Combretum primigenum</i>). According to Mr. C. G. Büttner, neither of the sticks need be of a special tree, and any wood that happens to be at hand may be employed for the purpose; only the wood of the thorny acacias, which abound in the country, appears to be unsuitable.<a id="r714"/><a class="c005" href="#f714"><sup>[714]</sup></a> Probably the rule mentioned by Dr. Schinz is the original one, and if in some places the wood of the <span class="pageno" id="Page_219">219</span>sacred tree has ceased to be used to light the holy fire, the reason may be simply that the tree does not grow there, and that accordingly the people are obliged to use such wood as they can find. We have seen that a branch of the sacred <i>omumborombonga</i> tree is regularly planted beside the village hearth, but that in default of it the people have to put up with a bough of another kind of tree, the <i>omuwapu</i> (<i>Grevia spec</i>).<a id="r715"/><a class="c005" href="#f715"><sup>[715]</sup></a> Such substitutions were especially apt to be forced on the Herero in the southern part of the country, where the <i>omumborombonga</i> tree is very rare and forests do not exist, the larger trees growing singly or in clumps. In the north, on the other hand, vegetation is much richer, and regular woods are to be found. Here, in particular, the <i>omumborombonga</i> tree is one of the ornaments of the landscape. It grows only beside water-courses, and generally stands solitary, surpassing a tall oak in height, and rivalling it in girth; indeed, so thick is the trunk that were it hollowed out a family could lodge in it. Unlike most trees in the country it is thornless. Whole forests of it grow to the eastward of Hereroland, in the direction of Lake Ngami. So close is the grain and so heavy the wood that some of the early explorers gave it the name of the “iron tree.”<a id="r716"/><a class="c005" href="#f716"><sup>[716]</sup></a> Hence it is well adapted to form the upright stick of the fire-drill, for which a hard wood is required.</p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Herero tradition of the origin of men and cattle from the sacred <i>omumborombonga</i> tree.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> The Herero have a tradition that in the beginning they and their cattle and all four-footed beasts came forth from the <i>omumborombonga</i> tree in a single day, whereas birds, fish, and creeping things sprang from the rain. However, slightly different versions of the Herero genesis appear to be current. As to the origin of men and cattle from the tree, public opinion is unanimous; but some dissenters hold that sheep and perhaps goats, but certainly sheep, issued from a flat rock in the north of the country. For some time past, unfortunately, the tree has ceased to be prolific; it is of no <span class="pageno" id="Page_220">220</span>use waiting beside it in the hope of capturing such oxen and sheep as it might bear. Yet still the Herero testify great respect for the tree which they regard as their ancestor (<i>omukuru</i>). To injure it is deemed a sacrilege which the ancestor will punish sooner or later. In passing it they bow reverently and stick a bunch of green twigs or grass into the trunk or throw it down at the foot. They address the tree, saying, “<i>U-zera tate mukururume</i>, Thou art holy, grandfather!” and they even enter into conversation with it, giving the answers themselves in a changed voice. They hardly dare to sit down in its shadow. All this reverence they display for every tree of the species.<a id="r717"/><a class="c005" href="#f717"><sup>[717]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Migration from one country to another sometimes involves a change of sacred tree.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> On the whole, then, we may infer that so long as the Herero dwelt in a land where their ancestral tree abounded, they made the male fire-stick from its wood; but that as they gradually migrated from a region of tropical rains and luxuriant forests to the arid mountains, open grass lands, and dry torrid climate of their present country,<a id="r718"/><a class="c005" href="#f718"><sup>[718]</sup></a> they had in some places to forgo its use and to take another tree in its stead. Similarly the Aryan invaders of Greece and Italy were obliged, under a southern sky, to seek substitutes for the sacred oak of their old northern home; and more and more, as time went on and the deciduous woods retreated up the mountain slopes, they found what they sought in the laurel, the olive, and the vine. Zeus himself had to put up with the white poplar at his great sanctuary of Olympia in the hot lowlands of Elis;<a id="r719"/><a class="c005" href="#f719"><sup>[719]</sup></a> and on summer days, when the light leaves of the poplar hardly stirred in the languid air and the buzz of the flies was more than usually exasperating, <span class="pageno" id="Page_221">221</span>he perhaps looked wistfully away to the Arcadian mountains, looming blue in the distance through a haze of heat, and sighed for the shadow and the coolness of their oak woods.</p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The worship of the chief’s fire a form of ancestor-worship.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> Thus it appears that the sanctity ascribed by the Herero to the chief’s fire springs from a custom of kindling it with the wood of their ancestral tree; in fact, the cult of the fire resolves itself into a form of ancestor-worship. For the religion of the Herero, like that of all Bantu peoples, is first and foremost a propitiation of the spirits of their forefathers conceived as powerful beings able and willing to harm them. From youth to death the Herero live in constant dread of their ancestors (<i>ovakuru</i>, plural of <i>omukuru</i>), who, sometimes seen and sometimes unseen, return to earth and play their descendants many a spiteful trick. They glide into the village, steal the milk, drive the cattle from the fold, and waylay women. More than that, they can inflict disease and death, decide the issue of war, and send or withhold rain at pleasure. They are the cause of every vexation and misfortune, and the whole aim of the living is by frequent sacrifices to mollify and appease the dead.<a id="r720"/><a class="c005" href="#f720"><sup>[720]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The sacred hearth a special seat of the ancestral spirits.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> Now the sacred hearth seems to be in a special sense the seat of the worship paid to the ancestral spirits. Here the head of the family sits and communes with his forefather, giving himself the answers he thinks fit.<a id="r721"/><a class="c005" href="#f721"><sup>[721]</sup></a> Hither the newborn child is brought with its mother to be introduced to the spirits and to receive its name, and the chief, addressing his ancestors, announces, “To you a child is born in your village; may this village never come to an end!”<a id="r722"/><a class="c005" href="#f722"><sup>[722]</sup></a> Hither the bride is conducted at her marriage, and a sheep having been sacrificed, its flesh is placed on the holy bushes at the <span class="pageno" id="Page_222">222</span>hearth.<a id="r723"/><a class="c005" href="#f723"><sup>[723]</sup></a> Hither the sick are carried to be commended to the care of their ghostly kinsmen, and as the sufferer is borne round and round the fire his friends chant:—</p>
			<div class="c007 lg-container-b">
				<div class="linegroup">
					<div class="group">
						<div class="line">“<i>See, Father, we have come here,</i></div>
						<div class="line">
							<i>With this sick man to you,</i>
						</div>
						<div class="line"><i>That he may soon recover.</i>”<a id="r724"/><a class="c005" href="#f724"><sup>[724]</sup></a></div>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="c008"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Sacred sticks representing the deceased ancestors of the Herero.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> But the most tangible link between the worship of the fire and the worship of the dead is furnished by the sacred sticks representing the ancestors, which are kept in a bundle together with the two sticks used for kindling the fire by friction. Each of these rude idols or Lares, as we may call them, “symbolises a definite ancestor of the paternal clan, and, taken together, they may be regarded as the most sacred possession of a family. They stand in the closest relation to the holy hearth, or rather to the priestly dignity, and must therefore always remain in the same paternal clan.”<a id="r725"/><a class="c005" href="#f725"><sup>[725]</sup></a> These sticks “are cut from trees or bushes which are dedicated to the ancestors, and they represent the ancestors at the sacrificial meals, for the cooked flesh of the victims is always set before them first. Many people always keep these sticks, tied up in a bundle with straps and hung with amulets, in the branches of the sacrificial bushes which stand on the sacred hearth (<i>okuruo</i>). The sacrificial bush serves to support the severed pieces of the victim, and thus in a measure represents an altar or table of sacrifice.”<a id="r726"/><a class="c005" href="#f726"><sup>[726]</sup></a> When after an absence of years the people return to a village where a chief died and was buried, a new fire is kindled by friction on the old hearth, the flesh of the first animal slaughtered here is cooked in a particular vessel, and the chief hands a portion of it to every person present. “An image, consisting of two pieces of wood, supposed to represent the household deity, or rather the deified parent, is then produced, and moistened in the platter of each individual. The chief then takes the image, and, after affixing a piece of meat to the upper end of it, he plants it in the ground, on the identical spot where his parent <span class="pageno" id="Page_223">223</span>was accustomed to sacrifice. The first pail of milk produced from the cattle is also taken to the grave; a small quantity is poured on the ground, and a blessing asked on the remainder.” Each clan, the writer adds, has a particular tree or shrub consecrated to it, and of this tree or shrub the two sticks representing the deceased are made.<a id="r727"/><a class="c005" href="#f727"><sup>[727]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The sacred sticks representing the ancestors are probably the fire-sticks which were used to kindle fresh fire in the village after a death.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> In these accounts the sacred sticks which stand for the ancestors, and to which the meat of sacrifices is first offered, are distinguished, expressly or implicitly, from the sacred sticks which are used to make the holy fire.<a id="r728"/><a class="c005" href="#f728"><sup>[728]</sup></a> Other writers, however, identify the two sets of sticks. Thus we are told that the Herero “make images of their ancestors as follows. They take the two sticks with which they make fire and tie them together with a fresh wisp of corn. Then they worship this object as their ancestor. They may approach it only on their knees. For hours together they sit before it and talk with it. If you ask them where they imagine their ancestors to be, since they cannot surely be these sticks, they answer that they do not know. The sticks are kept in the house of the great wife.”<a id="r729"/><a class="c005" href="#f729"><sup>[729]</sup></a> Again, another writer defines the <i>ondume</i> or male fire-stick as a “stick representing an <i>omukuru</i>, <i>i.e.</i> ancestor, deity, with which and the <i>otyiza</i> the holy fire is made.”<a id="r730"/><a class="c005" href="#f730"><sup>[730]</sup></a> Again, the Rev. G. Viehe, in describing the ceremonies observed at the return to a deserted village where an ancestor (<i>omukuru</i>) is buried, tells us that they bring no fire with them, “but holy fire must now be obtained from the <i>omukuru</i>. This is done with the <i>ondume</i> and the <span class="pageno" id="Page_224">224</span><i>otyiza</i>. The meaning of these two words plainly shows that the first represents the <i>omukuru</i>, and the other his wife.”<a id="r731"/><a class="c005" href="#f731"><sup>[731]</sup></a> The same excellent authority defines the <i>ozondume</i> as “sticks which represent the <i>ovakuru</i>, <i>i.e.</i> ancestors, deities”;<a id="r732"/><a class="c005" href="#f732"><sup>[732]</sup></a> and <i>ozondume</i> is simply the plural of <i>ondume</i>, the male fire-stick.<a id="r733"/><a class="c005" href="#f733"><sup>[733]</sup></a> Hence it appears highly probable that the sticks representing the ancestors are, in fact, nothing but the male fire-sticks, each of which was cut to make a new fire on the return to the old village after a chiefs death. The stick would be an appropriate emblem of the deceased, who had been in his lifetime the owner of the sacred fire, and who now after his death bestowed it on his descendants by means of the friction of his wooden image. And the symbolism will appear all the more natural when we remember that the male fire-stick is generally made from the ancestral tree, that the process of fire-making is regarded by the Herero as the begetting of a child, and that their name for the stick, according to the most probable etymology, signifies “the begetter.” Such sticks would be far too sacred to be thrown away when they had served their immediate purpose of kindling a new fire, and thus in time a whole bundle of them would accumulate, each of them recalling, and in a sense representing, one of the great forefathers of the tribe. When the old sticks had ceased to be used as fire-lighters, and were preserved merely as memorials of the dead, it is not surprising that their original function should be overlooked by some European observers, who have thus been led to distinguish them from the sticks by which the fire is actually produced at the present day.<a id="r734"/><a class="c005" href="#f734"><sup>[734]</sup></a> Amongst the <span class="pageno" id="Page_225">225</span><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>Sacred fire-boards among the Koryaks and Chuckchees of north-eastern Asia.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> Koryaks of north-eastern Asia, when the sacred fire-boards, roughly carved in human form, are so full of holes that they can no longer be used for the purpose of kindling fire, they are still kept as holy relics in a shrine near the door of the house; and a stranger who observed the respect with which they are treated, but who did not know their history, might well mistake them for figures of worshipful ancestors and never guess the practical purpose which they once served as fire-lighters. A Koryak family regards its sacred fire-board not only as the deity of the household fire, the guardian of the family hearth, but also as the guardian of the reindeer, and they call it the “master of the herd.” It is supposed to protect the reindeer from wolves and from sickness and to prevent the animals from straying away and being lost. When a reindeer is slaughtered, the sacred fire-board is taken out and smeared with the blood. The maritime Koryaks, who do not live by reindeer, regard the sacred fire-board as the master of the underground house and the helper in the hunt of sea-mammals. They call it “father” and feed it from time to time with fat, which they smear on its mouth.<a id="r735"/><a class="c005" href="#f735"><sup>[735]</sup></a> Among the neighbouring Chuckchees in the north-eastern extremity of Asia similar ideas and customs obtain in respect of the fire-boards. These are roughly carved in human form and personified, almost deified, as the supernatural guardians of the reindeer. The holes made by drilling in the board are deemed the eyes of the figure and the squeaking noise produced by the friction of the fire-drill in the hole is thought to be its voice. At every sacrifice the mouth of the figure is greased with tallow or with the marrow of bones. When a new fire-board is made, it is consecrated by being smeared with the blood of a slaughtered reindeer, and the owner says, “Enough! Take up your abode here!” Then the other fire-boards are brought to the same place and set side by side on the ground. The owner says, “Ho! these are your companions. See that I always find easily every kind of game!” Next he slaughters another reindeer and says, <span class="pageno" id="Page_226">226</span>“Hi! Since you are one of my young men, go and drive the herd hither!” Then after a pause he asks the fire-board, “Have you brought it?” to which in the name of the fire-board he answers, “I have.” Thereupon, speaking in his own person, he says, “Then catch some reindeer! It seems that you will keep a good watch over the herd. There, from the actual chief of the fire-boards, you may learn wisdom.” These sacred fire-boards are often handed down from generation to generation as family heir-looms. During the calving-season they are taken from their bag and placed behind the frame in the outer tent in order that they may protect the dams.<a id="r736"/><a class="c005" href="#f736"><sup>[736]</sup></a></p>
			<p class="c004"><span class="sni"><span class="hidev">|</span>The evolution of a fire-god or fire-goddess.<span class="hidev">|</span></span> These Koryak and Chuckchee customs illustrate the evolution of a fire-god into the patron deity of a family and his representation in human form by the board which is used in fire-making. As the fire-board is that part of the kindling apparatus which is commonly regarded as female in contradistinction to the drill, which is regarded as male, we can easily understand why the deity of the fire should sometimes, as at Rome, be conceived as a goddess rather than as a god; whereas if the drill itself were viewed as the essential part of the apparatus we should expect to find a fire-god and not a fire-goddess.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
