<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI: Oriental Religions in the West</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-4">
			<section id="book-4-2">
				<section id="chapter-4-2-6" epub:type="chapter">
					<hgroup>
						<h4 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h4>
						<h5 epub:type="title">Oriental Religions in the West</h5>
					</hgroup>
					<p>The worship of the Great Mother of the Gods and her lover or son was very popular under the Roman Empire. Inscriptions prove that the two received divine honours, separately or conjointly, not only in Italy, and especially at Rome, but also in the provinces, particularly in Africa, Spain, Portugal, France, Germany, and Bulgaria.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-896" id="noteref-4-1-896" epub:type="noteref">896</a> Their worship survived the establishment of Christianity by Constantine; for Symmachus records the recurrence of the festival of the Great Mother,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-897" id="noteref-4-1-897" epub:type="noteref">897</a> and in the days of Augustine her effeminate priests still paraded the streets and squares of Carthage with whitened faces, scented hair, and mincing gait, while, like the mendicant friars of the Middle Ages, they begged alms from the passersby.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-898" id="noteref-4-1-898" epub:type="noteref">898</a> In Greece, on the other hand, the bloody orgies of the Asiatic goddess and her consort appear to have found little favour.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-899" id="noteref-4-1-899" epub:type="noteref">899</a> The barbarous and cruel character of the worship, with its frantic excesses, was doubtless repugnant to the good taste and humanity of the Greeks, who seem to have preferred the kindred but gentler rites of Adonis. Yet the same features which shocked and repelled the Greeks may have positively attracted the less refined Romans and barbarians of the West. The ecstatic frenzies, which were mistaken for divine inspiration,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-900" id="noteref-4-1-900" epub:type="noteref">900</a> the mangling of the body, the theory of a new birth and the remission of sins through the shedding of blood, have all their origin in savagery,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-901" id="noteref-4-1-901" epub:type="noteref">901</a> and they naturally appealed to peoples in whom the savage instincts were still strong. Their true character was indeed often disguised under a decent veil of allegorical or philosophical interpretation,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-902" id="noteref-4-1-902" epub:type="noteref">902</a> which probably sufficed to impose upon the rapt and enthusiastic worshippers, reconciling even the more cultivated of them to things which otherwise must have filled them with horror and disgust.</p>
					<p>The religion of the Great Mother, with its curious blending of crude savagery with spiritual aspirations, was only one of a multitude of similar Oriental faiths which in the later days of paganism spread over the Roman Empire, and by saturating the European peoples with alien ideals of life gradually undermined the whole fabric of ancient civilization.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-903" id="noteref-4-1-903" epub:type="noteref">903</a> Greek and Roman society was built on the conception of the subordination of the individual to the community, of the citizen to the state; it set the safety of the commonwealth, as the supreme aim of conduct, above the safety of the individual whether in this world or in a world to come. Trained from infancy in this unselfish ideal, the citizens devoted their lives to the public service and were ready to lay them down for the common good; or if they shrank from the supreme sacrifice, it never occurred to them that they acted otherwise than basely in preferring their personal existence to the interests of their country. All this was changed by the spread of Oriental religions which inculcated the communion of the soul with God and its eternal salvation as the only objects worth living for, objects in comparison with which the prosperity and even the existence of the state sank into insignificance. The inevitable result of this selfish and immoral doctrine was to withdraw the devotee more and more from the public service, to concentrate his thoughts on his own spiritual emotions, and to breed in him a contempt for the present life which he regarded merely as a probation for a better and an eternal. The saint and the recluse, disdainful of earth and rapt in ecstatic contemplation of heaven, became in popular opinion the highest ideal of humanity, displacing the old ideal of the patriot and hero who, forgetful of self, lives and is ready to die for the good of his country. The earthly city seemed poor and contemptible to men whose eyes beheld the City of God coming in the clouds of heaven. Thus the centre of gravity, so to say, was shifted from the present to a future life, and however much the other world may have gained, there can be little doubt that this one lost heavily by the change. A general disintegration of the body politic set in. The ties of the state and the family were loosened: the structure of society tended to resolve itself into its individual elements and thereby to relapse into barbarism; for civilization is only possible through the active cooperation of the citizens and their willingness to subordinate their private interests to the common good. Men refused to defend their country and even to continue their kind.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-904" id="noteref-4-1-904" epub:type="noteref">904</a> In their anxiety to save their own souls and the souls of others, they were content to leave the material world, which they identified with the principle of evil, to perish around them. This obsession lasted for a thousand years. The revival of Roman law, of the Aristotelian philosophy, of ancient art and literature at the close of the Middle Ages, marked the return of Europe to native ideals of life and conduct, to saner, manlier views of the world. The long halt in the march of civilization was over. The tide of Oriental invasion had turned at last. It is ebbing still.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-905" id="noteref-4-1-905" epub:type="noteref">905</a></p>
					<p>Among the gods of eastern origin who in the decline of the ancient world competed against each other for the allegiance of the West was the old Persian deity Mithra. The immense popularity of his worship is attested by the monuments illustrative of it which have been found scattered in profusion all over the Roman Empire.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-906" id="noteref-4-1-906" epub:type="noteref">906</a> In respect both of doctrines and of rites the cult of Mithra appears to have presented many points of resemblance not only to the religion of the Mother of the Gods<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-907" id="noteref-4-1-907" epub:type="noteref">907</a> but also to Christianity.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-908" id="noteref-4-1-908" epub:type="noteref">908</a> The similarity struck the Christian doctors themselves and was explained by them as a work of the devil, who sought to seduce the souls of men from the true faith by a false and insidious imitation of it.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-909" id="noteref-4-1-909" epub:type="noteref">909</a> So to the Spanish conquerors of Mexico and Peru many of the native heathen rites appeared to be diabolical counterfeits of the Christian sacraments.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-910" id="noteref-4-1-910" epub:type="noteref">910</a> With more probability the modern student of comparative religion traces such resemblances to the similar and independent workings of the mind of man in his sincere, if crude, attempts to fathom the secret of the universe, and to adjust his little life to its awful mysteries. However that may be, there can be no doubt that the Mithraic religion proved a formidable rival to Christianity, combining as it did a solemn ritual with aspirations after moral purity and a hope of immortality.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-911" id="noteref-4-1-911" epub:type="noteref">911</a> Indeed the issue of the conflict between the two faiths appears for a time to have hung in the balance.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-912" id="noteref-4-1-912" epub:type="noteref">912</a> An instructive relic of the long struggle is preserved in our festival of Christmas, which the Church seems to have borrowed directly from its heathen rival. In the Julian calendar the twenty-fifth of December was reckoned the winter solstice,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-913" id="noteref-4-1-913" epub:type="noteref">913</a> and it was regarded as the Nativity of the Sun, because the day begins to lengthen and the power of the sun to increase from that turning-point of the year.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-914" id="noteref-4-1-914" epub:type="noteref">914</a> The ritual of the nativity, as it appears to have been celebrated in Syria and Egypt, was remarkable. The celebrants retired into certain inner shrines, from which at midnight they issued with a loud cry, “The Virgin has brought forth! The light is waxing!”<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-915" id="noteref-4-1-915" epub:type="noteref">915</a> The Egyptians even represented the newborn sun by the image of an infant which on his birthday, the winter solstice, they brought forth and exhibited to his worshippers.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-916" id="noteref-4-1-916" epub:type="noteref">916</a> No doubt the Virgin who thus conceived and bore a son on the twenty-fifth of December was the great Oriental goddess whom the Semites called the Heavenly Virgin or simply the Heavenly Goddess; in Semitic lands she was a form of Astarte.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-917" id="noteref-4-1-917" epub:type="noteref">917</a> Now Mithra was regularly identified by his worshippers with the Sun, the Unconquered Sun, as they called him;<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-918" id="noteref-4-1-918" epub:type="noteref">918</a> hence his nativity also fell on the twenty-fifth of December.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-919" id="noteref-4-1-919" epub:type="noteref">919</a> The Gospels say nothing as to the day of Christ’s birth, and accordingly the early Church did not celebrate it. In time, however, the Christians of Egypt came to regard the sixth of January as the date of the Nativity, and the custom of commemorating the birth of the Saviour on that day gradually spread until by the fourth century it was universally established in the East. But at the end of the third or the beginning of the fourth century the Western Church, which had never recognized the sixth of January as the day of the Nativity, adopted the twenty-fifth of December as the true date, and in time its decision was accepted also by the Eastern Church. At Antioch the change was not introduced till about the year 375 <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr><a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-920" id="noteref-4-1-920" epub:type="noteref">920</a></p>
					<p>What considerations led the ecclesiastical authorities to institute the festival of Christmas? The motives for the innovation are stated with great frankness by a Syrian writer, himself a Christian. “The reason,” he tells us, “why the fathers transferred the celebration of the sixth of January to the twenty-fifth of December was this. It was a custom of the heathen to celebrate on the same twenty-fifth of December the birthday of the Sun, at which they kindled lights in token of festivity. In these solemnities and festivities the Christians also took part. Accordingly when the doctors of the Church perceived that the Christians had a leaning to this festival, they took counsel and resolved that the true Nativity should be solemnized on that day and the festival of the Epiphany on the sixth of January. Accordingly, along with this custom, the practice has prevailed of kindling fires till the sixth.”<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-921" id="noteref-4-1-921" epub:type="noteref">921</a> The heathen origin of Christmas is plainly hinted at, if not tacitly admitted, by Augustine when he exhorts his Christian brethren not to celebrate that solemn day like the heathen on account of the sun, but on account of him who made the sun.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-922" id="noteref-4-1-922" epub:type="noteref">922</a> In like manner Leo the Great rebuked the pestilent belief that Christmas was solemnized because of the birth of the new sun, as it was called, and not because of the nativity of Christ.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-923" id="noteref-4-1-923" epub:type="noteref">923</a></p>
					<p>Thus it appears that the Christian Church chose to celebrate the birthday of its Founder on the twenty-fifth of December in order to transfer the devotion of the heathen from the Sun to him who was called the Sun of Righteousness.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-924" id="noteref-4-1-924" epub:type="noteref">924</a> If that was so, there can be no intrinsic improbability in the conjecture that motives of the same sort may have led the ecclesiastical authorities to assimilate the Easter festival of the death and resurrection of their Lord to the festival of the death and resurrection of another Asiatic god which fell at the same season. Now the Easter rites still observed in Greece, Sicily, and Southern Italy bear in some respects a striking resemblance to the rites of Adonis, and I have suggested that the Church may have consciously adapted the new festival to its heathen predecessor for the sake of winning souls to Christ.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-925" id="noteref-4-1-925" epub:type="noteref">925</a> But this adaptation probably took place in the Greek-speaking rather than in the Latin-speaking parts of the ancient world; for the worship of Adonis, while it flourished among the Greeks, appears to have made little impression on Rome and the West.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-926" id="noteref-4-1-926" epub:type="noteref">926</a> Certainly it never formed part of the official Roman religion. The place which it might have taken in the affections of the vulgar was already occupied by the similar but more barbarous worship of Attis and the Great Mother. Now the death and resurrection of Attis were officially celebrated at Rome on the twenty-fourth and twenty-fifth of March,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-927" id="noteref-4-1-927" epub:type="noteref">927</a> the latter being regarded as the spring equinox,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-928" id="noteref-4-1-928" epub:type="noteref">928</a> and therefore as the most appropriate day for the revival of a god of vegetation who had been dead or sleeping throughout the winter. But according to an ancient and widespread tradition Christ suffered on the twenty-fifth of March, and accordingly some Christians regularly celebrated the Crucifixion on that day without any regard to the state of the moon. This custom was certainly observed in Phrygia, Cappadocia, and Gaul, and there seem to be grounds for thinking that at one time it was followed also in Rome.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-929" id="noteref-4-1-929" epub:type="noteref">929</a> Thus the tradition which placed the death of Christ on the twenty-fifth of March was ancient and deeply rooted. It is all the more remarkable because astronomical considerations prove that it can have had no historical foundation.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-930" id="noteref-4-1-930" epub:type="noteref">930</a> The inference appears to be inevitable that the passion of Christ must have been arbitrarily referred to that date in order to harmonize with an older festival of the spring equinox. This is the view of the learned ecclesiastical historian Mgr. Duchesne, who points out that the death of the Saviour was thus made to fall upon the very day on which, according to a widespread belief, the world had been created.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-931" id="noteref-4-1-931" epub:type="noteref">931</a> But the resurrection of Attis, who combined in himself the characters of the divine Father and the divine Son,<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-932" id="noteref-4-1-932" epub:type="noteref">932</a> was officially celebrated at Rome on the same day. When we remember that the festival of <abbr>St.</abbr> George in April has replaced the ancient pagan festival of the Parilia;<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-933" id="noteref-4-1-933" epub:type="noteref">933</a> that the festival of <abbr>St.</abbr> John the Baptist in June has succeeded to a heathen Midsummer festival of water;<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-934" id="noteref-4-1-934" epub:type="noteref">934</a> that the festival of the Assumption of the Virgin in August has ousted the festival of Diana;<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-935" id="noteref-4-1-935" epub:type="noteref">935</a> that the feast of All Souls in November is a continuation of an old heathen feast of the dead;<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-936" id="noteref-4-1-936" epub:type="noteref">936</a> and that the Nativity of Christ himself was assigned to the winter solstice in December because that day was deemed the Nativity of the Sun;<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-937" id="noteref-4-1-937" epub:type="noteref">937</a> we can hardly be thought rash or unreasonable in conjecturing that the other cardinal festival of the Christian church⁠—the solemnization of Easter⁠—may have been in like manner, and from like motives of edification, adapted to a similar celebration of the Phrygian god Attis at the vernal equinox.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-938" id="noteref-4-1-938" epub:type="noteref">938</a></p>
					<p>At least it is a remarkable coincidence, if it is nothing more, that the Christian and the heathen festivals of the divine death and resurrection should have been solemnized at the same season and in the same places. For the places which celebrated the death of Christ at the spring equinox were Phrygia, Gaul, and apparently Rome, that is, the very regions in which the worship of Attis either originated or struck deepest root. It is difficult to regard the coincidence as purely accidental. If the vernal equinox, the season at which in the temperate regions the whole face of nature testifies to a fresh outburst of vital energy, had been viewed from of old as the time when the world was annually created afresh in the resurrection of a god, nothing could be more natural than to place the resurrection of the new deity at the same cardinal point of the year. Only it is to be observed that if the death of Christ was dated on the twenty-fifth of March, his resurrection, according to Christian tradition, must have happened on the twenty-seventh of March, which is just two days later than the vernal equinox of the Julian calendar and the resurrection of Attis. A similar displacement of two days in the adjustment of Christian to heathen celebrations occurs in the festivals of <abbr>St.</abbr> George and the Assumption of the Virgin. However, another Christian tradition, followed by Lactantius and perhaps by the practice of the Church in Gaul, placed the death of Christ on the twenty-third and his resurrection on the twenty-fifth of March.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-939" id="noteref-4-1-939" epub:type="noteref">939</a> If that was so, his resurrection coincided exactly with the resurrection of Attis.</p>
					<p>In point of fact it appears from the testimony of an anonymous Christian, who wrote in the fourth century of our era, that Christians and pagans alike were struck by the remarkable coincidence between the death and resurrection of their respective deities, and that the coincidence formed a theme of bitter controversy between the adherents of the rival religions, the pagans contending that the resurrection of Christ was a spurious imitation of the resurrection of Attis, and the Christians asserting with equal warmth that the resurrection of Attis was a diabolical counterfeit of the resurrection of Christ. In these unseemly bickerings the heathen took what to a superficial observer might seem strong ground by arguing that their god was the older and therefore presumably the original, not the counterfeit, since as a general rule an original is older than its copy. This feeble argument the Christians easily rebutted. They admitted, indeed, that in point of time Christ was the junior deity, but they triumphantly demonstrated his real seniority by falling back on the subtlety of Satan, who on so important an occasion had surpassed himself by inverting the usual order of nature.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-940" id="noteref-4-1-940" epub:type="noteref">940</a></p>
					<p>Taken altogether, the coincidences of the Christian with the heathen festivals are too close and too numerous to be accidental. They mark the compromise which the Church in the hour of its triumph was compelled to make with its vanquished yet still dangerous rivals. The inflexible Protestantism of the primitive missionaries, with their fiery denunciations of heathendom, had been exchanged for the supple policy, the easy tolerance, the comprehensive charity of shrewd ecclesiastics, who clearly perceived that if Christianity was to conquer the world it could do so only by relaxing the too rigid principles of its Founder, by widening a little the narrow gate which leads to salvation. In this respect an instructive parallel might be drawn between the history of Christianity and the history of Buddhism.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-941" id="noteref-4-1-941" epub:type="noteref">941</a> Both systems were in their origin essentially ethical reforms born of the generous ardour, the lofty aspirations, the tender compassion of their noble Founders, two of those beautiful spirits who appear at rare intervals on earth like beings come from a better world to support and guide our weak and erring nature.<a href="endnotes-4-1.xhtml#note-4-1-942" id="noteref-4-1-942" epub:type="noteref">942</a> Both preached moral virtue as the means of accomplishing what they regarded as the supreme object of life, the eternal salvation of the individual soul, though by a curious antithesis the one sought that salvation in a blissful eternity, the other in a final release from suffering, in annihilation. But the austere ideals of sanctity which they inculcated were too deeply opposed not only to the frailties but to the natural instincts of humanity ever to be carried out in practice by more than a small number of disciples, who consistently renounced the ties of the family and the state in order to work out their own salvation in the still seclusion of the cloister. If such faiths were to be nominally accepted by whole nations or even by the world, it was essential that they should first be modified or transformed so as to accord in some measure with the prejudices, the passions, the superstitions of the vulgar. This process of accommodation was carried out in after ages by followers who, made of less ethereal stuff than their masters, were for that reason the better fitted to mediate between them and the common herd. Thus as time went on, the two religions, in exact proportion to their growing popularity, absorbed more and more of those baser elements which they had been instituted for the very purpose of suppressing. Such spiritual decadences are inevitable. The world cannot live at the level of its great men. Yet it would be unfair to the generality of our kind to ascribe wholly to their intellectual and moral weakness the gradual divergence of Buddhism and Christianity from their primitive patterns. For it should never be forgotten that by their glorification of poverty and celibacy both these religions struck straight at the root not merely of civil society but of human existence. The blow was parried by the wisdom or the folly of the vast majority of mankind, who refused to purchase a chance of saving their souls with the certainty of extinguishing the species.</p>
				</section>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
