<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-11" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc63" name="toc63"/>
				<a id="pdf64" name="pdf64"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Addenda.</span>
				</h1>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">P. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg104">104</a>. <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">The sacred precinct of Pelops at Olympia.</span></em>—It deserves to be noted that just as Pelops, whose legend reflects the origin of the chariot-race, had his sacred precinct and probably his tomb at Olympia, in like manner Endymion, whose legend reflects the origin of the foot-race,<a href="#note_763" id="noteref_763" name="noteref_763"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">763</span></span></a> had his tomb at the end of the Olympic stadium, at the point where the runners started in the race.<a href="#note_764" id="noteref_764" name="noteref_764"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">764</span></span></a> This presence at Olympia of the graves of the two early kings, whose names are associated with the origin of the foot-race and of the chariot-race respectively, can hardly be without significance; it indicates the important part played by the dead in the foundation of the Olympic games.</p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">P. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg188">188</a>. <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">A man is literally reborn in the person of his son.</span></em>—This belief in the possible rebirth of the parent in the child may sometimes explain the seemingly widespread dislike of people to have children like themselves. Examples of such a dislike have met us in a former part of this work.<a href="#note_765" id="noteref_765" name="noteref_765"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">765</span></span></a> A similar superstition prevails among the Papuans of Doreh Bay in Dutch New Guinea. When a son resembles his father or a daughter resembles her mother closely in features, these savages fear that the father or mother will soon die.<a href="#note_766" id="noteref_766" name="noteref_766"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">766</span></span></a> Again, in the island of Savou, to the south-west of Timor, if a child at birth is thought to be like its father or mother, it may not remain under the parental roof, else the person whom it resembles would soon die.<a href="#note_767" id="noteref_767" name="noteref_767"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">767</span></span></a> Such superstitions, it is obvious, might readily suggest the expedient of killing the child in order to save the life of the parent.</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page289">[pg 289]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg289" name="Pg289"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
