<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-1-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<a id="toc33" name="toc33"/>
				<a id="pdf34" name="pdf34"/>
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter V. The Burning of Melcarth.</span>
				</h2>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Semitic custom of sacrificing a member of the royal family. The burning of Melcarth at Tyre. Festival of</span>
						<span class="tei tei-q">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">“</span>
							<span style="font-size: 80%">the awakening of Hercules</span>
							<span style="font-size: 80%">”</span>
						</span>
						<span style="font-size: 80%">at Tyre.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>If a custom of putting a king or his son to death in the character of a god has left small traces of itself in Cyprus, an island where the fierce zeal of Semitic religion was early tempered by Greek humanity, the vestiges of that gloomy rite are clearer in Phoenicia itself and in the Phoenician colonies, which lay more remote from the highways of Grecian commerce. We know that the Semites were in the habit of sacrificing some of their children, generally the first-born, either as a tribute regularly due to the deity or to appease his anger in seasons of public danger and calamity.<a href="#note_346" id="noteref_346" name="noteref_346"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">346</span></span></a> If commoners did so, is it likely that kings, with all their heavy responsibilities, could exempt themselves from this dreadful sacrifice for the fatherland? In point of fact, history informs us that kings steeled themselves to do as others did.<a href="#note_347" id="noteref_347" name="noteref_347"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">347</span></span></a> It deserves to be noticed that if Mesha, king of Moab, who sacrificed his eldest son by fire, claimed to be a son of his god,<a href="#note_348" id="noteref_348" name="noteref_348"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">348</span></span></a> he would no doubt transmit his divinity to his offspring; and further, that the same sacrifice is said to have been performed in the same way by the divine founder of Byblus, the great seat of the worship of Adonis.<a href="#note_349" id="noteref_349" name="noteref_349"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">349</span></span></a> This suggests that the human representatives of Adonis formerly perished in the flames. At all events, a custom of periodically burning the chief god of the city in effigy appears to have prevailed <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page111">[pg 111]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg111" name="Pg111"/> at Tyre and in the Tyrian colonies down to a late time, and the effigy may well have been a later substitute for a man. For Melcarth, the great god of Tyre, was identified by the Greeks with Hercules,<a href="#note_350" id="noteref_350" name="noteref_350"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">350</span></span></a> who is said to have burned himself to death on a great pyre, ascending up to heaven in a cloud and a peal of thunder.<a href="#note_351" id="noteref_351" name="noteref_351"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">351</span></span></a> The common Greek legend, immortalized by Sophocles, laid the scene of the fiery tragedy on the top of Mount Oeta, but another version transferred it significantly to Tyre itself.<a href="#note_352" id="noteref_352" name="noteref_352"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">352</span></span></a> Combined with the other evidence which I shall adduce, this latter tradition raises a strong presumption that an effigy of Hercules, or rather of Melcarth, was regularly burned at a great festival in Tyre. That festival may have been the one known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the awakening of Hercules,”</span> which was held in the month of Peritius, answering nearly to January.<a href="#note_353" id="noteref_353" name="noteref_353"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">353</span></span></a> The name of the festival suggests that the dramatic representation of the death of the god on the pyre was followed by a semblance of his resurrection. The mode in which the resurrection was supposed to be effected is perhaps indicated by the statement of a Greek writer that the Phoenicians used to sacrifice quails to Hercules, because Hercules on his journey to Libya had been slain by Typhon and brought to life again by Iolaus, who held a quail under his nose: the dead god snuffed at the bird and revived.<a href="#note_354" id="noteref_354" name="noteref_354"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">354</span></span></a> According to another account Iolaus burnt a quail alive, and the dead hero, who <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page112">[pg 112]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg112" name="Pg112"/> loved quails, came to life again through the savoury smell of the roasted bird.<a href="#note_355" id="noteref_355" name="noteref_355"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">355</span></span></a> This latter tradition seems to point to a custom of burning the quails alive in the Phoenician sacrifices to Melcarth.<a href="#note_356" id="noteref_356" name="noteref_356"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">356</span></span></a> A festival of the god's resurrection might appropriately be held in spring, when the quails migrate northwards across the Mediterranean in great bands, and immense numbers of them are netted for the market.<a href="#note_357" id="noteref_357" name="noteref_357"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">357</span></span></a> In the month of March the birds return to Palestine by myriads in a single night, and remain to breed in all the open plains, marshes, and cornfields.<a href="#note_358" id="noteref_358" name="noteref_358"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">358</span></span></a> Certainly a close connexion seems to have subsisted between quails and Melcarth; for legend ran that Asteria, the mother of the Tyrian Hercules, that is, of Melcarth, was transformed into a quail.<a href="#note_359" id="noteref_359" name="noteref_359"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">359</span></span></a> It was probably to this annual festival of the death and resurrection of Melcarth that the Carthaginians were wont to send ambassadors every year to Tyre, their mother-city.<a href="#note_360" id="noteref_360" name="noteref_360"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">360</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Worship of Melcarth at Gades, and trace of a custom of burning him there in effigy.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>In Gades, the modern Cadiz, an early colony of Tyre on the Atlantic coast of Spain,<a href="#note_361" id="noteref_361" name="noteref_361"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">361</span></span></a> there was an ancient, famous, and wealthy sanctuary of Hercules, the Tyrian Melcarth. Indeed the god was said to be buried on the spot. No image stood in his temple, but a perpetual fire burned on the altar, and incense was offered by white-robed priests, with bare feet and shorn heads, who were bound to chastity. Neither women nor pigs might pollute the holy place by their presence. In later times many distinguished Romans went on pilgrimage to this remote shrine on the Atlantic shore when they were about to embark on some perilous <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page113">[pg 113]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg113" name="Pg113"/> enterprise, and they returned to it to pay their vows when their petitions had been granted.<a href="#note_362" id="noteref_362" name="noteref_362"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">362</span></span></a> One of the last things Hannibal himself did before he marched on Italy was to repair to Gades and offer up to Melcarth prayers which were never to be answered. Soon after he dreamed an ominous dream.<a href="#note_363" id="noteref_363" name="noteref_363"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">363</span></span></a> Now it would appear that at Gades, as at Tyre, though no image of Melcarth stood in the temple, an effigy of him was made up and burned at a yearly festival. For a certain Cleon of Magnesia related how, visiting Gades, he was obliged to sail away from the island with the rest of the multitude in obedience to the command of Hercules, that is, of Melcarth, and how on their return they found a monstrous man of the sea stranded on the beach and burning; for the god, they were told, had struck him with a thunderbolt.<a href="#note_364" id="noteref_364" name="noteref_364"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">364</span></span></a> We may conjecture that at the annual festival of Melcarth strangers were obliged to quit the city, and that in their absence the mystery of burning the god was consummated. What Cleon and the rest saw on their return to Gades would, on this hypothesis, be the smouldering remains of a gigantic effigy of Melcarth in the likeness of a man riding on a sea-horse, just as he is represented on coins of Tyre.<a href="#note_365" id="noteref_365" name="noteref_365"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">365</span></span></a> In like manner the Greeks portrayed the sea-god Melicertes, whose name is only a slightly altered form of Melcarth, riding on a dolphin or stretched on the beast's back.<a href="#note_366" id="noteref_366" name="noteref_366"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">366</span></span></a></p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Evidence of a custom of burning a god or goddess at Carthage. The fire-walk at Tyre. The fire-walk at Castabala. The Carthaginian king Hamilcar sacrifices himself in the fire.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>At Carthage, the greatest of the Tyrian colonies, a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page114">[pg 114]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg114" name="Pg114"/> reminiscence of the custom of burning a deity in effigy seems to linger in the story that Dido or Elissa, the foundress and queen of the city, stabbed herself to death upon a pyre, or leaped from her palace into the blazing pile, to escape the fond importunities of one lover or in despair at the cruel desertion of another.<a href="#note_367" id="noteref_367" name="noteref_367"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">367</span></span></a> We are told that Dido was worshipped as a goddess at Carthage so long as the country maintained its independence.<a href="#note_368" id="noteref_368" name="noteref_368"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">368</span></span></a> Her temple stood in the centre of the city shaded by a grove of solemn yews and firs.<a href="#note_369" id="noteref_369" name="noteref_369"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">369</span></span></a> The two apparently contradictory views of her character as a queen and a goddess may be reconciled if we suppose that she was both the one and the other; that in fact the queen of Carthage in early days, like the queen of Egypt down to historical times, was regarded as divine, and had, like human deities elsewhere, to die a violent death either at the end of a fixed period or whenever her bodily and mental powers began to fail. In later ages the stern old custom might be softened down into a pretence by substituting an effigy for the queen or by allowing her to pass through the fire unscathed. A similar modification of the ancient rule appears to have been allowed at Tyre itself, the mother-city of Carthage. We have seen reason to think that the kings of Tyre, from whom Dido was descended, claimed to personate the god Melcarth, and that the deity was burned either in effigy or in the person of a man at an annual festival.<a href="#note_370" id="noteref_370" name="noteref_370"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">370</span></span></a> Now in the same chapter in which Ezekiel charges the king of Tyre with claiming to be a god, the prophet describes him as walking <span class="tei tei-q">“up and down amidst the stones of fire.”</span><a href="#note_371" id="noteref_371" name="noteref_371"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">371</span></span></a> The description becomes at once intelligible <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page115">[pg 115]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg115" name="Pg115"/> if we suppose that in later times the king of Tyre compounded for being burnt in the fire by walking up and down on hot stones, thereby saving his life at the expense perhaps of a few blisters on his feet. It is possible that when all went well with the commonwealth, children whom strict law doomed to the furnace of Moloch may also have been mercifully allowed to escape on condition of running the fiery gauntlet. At all events, a religious rite of this sort has been and is still practised in many parts of the world: the performers solemnly pace through a furnace of heated stones or glowing wood-ashes in the presence of a multitude of spectators. Examples of the custom have been adduced in another part of this work.<a href="#note_372" id="noteref_372" name="noteref_372"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">372</span></span></a> Here I will cite only one. At Castabala, in Southern Cappadocia, there was worshipped an Asiatic goddess whom the Greeks called the Perasian Artemis. Her priestesses used to walk barefoot over a fire of charcoal without sustaining any injury. That this rite was a substitute for burning human beings alive or dead is suggested by the tradition which placed the adventure of Orestes and the Tauric Artemis at Castabala;<a href="#note_373" id="noteref_373" name="noteref_373"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">373</span></span></a> for the men or women sacrificed to the Tauric Artemis were first put to the sword and then burned in a pit of sacred fire.<a href="#note_374" id="noteref_374" name="noteref_374"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">374</span></span></a> Among the Carthaginians another trace of such a practice may perhaps be detected in the story that at the desperate battle of Himera, fought from dawn of day till late in the evening, the Carthaginian king Hamilcar remained in the camp and kept sacrificing holocausts of victims on a huge pyre; but when he saw his army giving <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page116">[pg 116]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg116" name="Pg116"/> way before the Greeks, he flung himself into the flames and was burned to death. Afterwards his countrymen sacrificed to him and erected a great monument in his honour at Carthage, while lesser monuments were reared to his memory in all the Punic colonies.<a href="#note_375" id="noteref_375" name="noteref_375"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">375</span></span></a> In public emergencies which called for extraordinary measures a king of Carthage may well have felt bound in honour to sacrifice himself in the old way for the good of his country. That the Carthaginians regarded the death of Hamilcar as an act of heroism and not as a mere suicide of despair, is proved by the posthumous honours they paid him.</p>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">The death of Hercules a Greek version of the burning of Melcarth.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The foregoing evidence, taken altogether, raises a strong presumption, though it cannot be said to amount to a proof, that a practice of burning a deity, and especially Melcarth, in effigy or in the person of a human representative, was observed at an annual festival in Tyre and its colonies. We can thus understand how Hercules, in so far as he represented the Tyrian god, was believed to have perished by a voluntary death on a pyre. For on many a beach and headland of the Aegean, where the Phoenicians had their trading factories, the Greeks may have watched the bale-fires of Melcarth blazing in the darkness of night, and have learned with wonder that the strange foreign folk were burning their god. In this way the legend of the voyages of Hercules and his death in the flames may be supposed to have originated. Yet with the legend the Greeks borrowed the custom of burning the god; for at the festivals of Hercules a pyre used to be kindled in memory of the hero's fiery death on Mount Oeta.<a href="#note_376" id="noteref_376" name="noteref_376"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">376</span></span></a> We may surmise, though we are not expressly told, that an effigy of Hercules was regularly burned on the pyre.</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page117">[pg 117]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg117" name="Pg117"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
