<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-1-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter IX. The Ritual of Adonis.</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Thus far we have dealt with the myth of Adonis and the legends which associated him with Byblus and Paphos. A discussion of these legends led us to the conclusion that among Semitic peoples in early times, Adonis, the divine lord of the city, was often personated by priestly kings or other members of the royal family, and that these his human representatives were of old put to death, whether periodically or occasionally, in their divine character. Further, we found that certain traditions and monuments of Asia Minor seem to preserve traces of a similar practice. As time went on, the cruel custom was apparently mitigated in various ways; for example, by substituting an effigy or an animal for the man, or by allowing the destined victim to escape with a merely make-believe sacrifice. The evidence of all this is drawn from a variety of scattered and often ambiguous indications: it is fragmentary, it is uncertain, and the conclusions built upon it inevitably partake of the weakness of the foundation. Where the records are so imperfect, as they happen to be in this branch of our subject, the element of hypothesis must enter largely into any attempt to piece together and interpret the disjointed facts. How far the interpretations here proposed are sound, I leave to future inquiries to determine.</p>
				<p>From dim regions of the past, where we have had to grope our way with small help from the lamp of history, it is a relief to pass to those later periods of classical antiquity on which contemporary Greek writers have shed the light of their clear intelligence. To them we owe almost all that we know for certain about the rites of Adonis. The Semites who practised the worship have said little about it; at all events little that they said has come down to us. Accordingly, the following account of the ritual is derived mainly from Greek authors who saw what they describe; and it applies to ages in which the growth of humane feeling had softened some of the harsher features of the worship.</p>
				<p>At the festivals of Adonis, which were held in Western Asia and in Greek lands, the death of the god was annually mourned, with a bitter wailing, chiefly by women; images of him, dressed to resemble corpses, were carried out as to burial and then thrown into the sea or into springs;<a href="#note_668" id="noteref_668" name="noteref_668"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">668</span></span></a> and in some places his revival was celebrated on the following day.<a href="#note_669" id="noteref_669" name="noteref_669"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">669</span></span></a> But at different places the ceremonies varied somewhat in the manner and apparently also in the season of their celebration. At Alexandria images of Aphrodite and Adonis were displayed on two couches; beside them were set ripe fruits of all kinds, cakes, plants growing in flower-pots, and green bowers twined with anise. The marriage of the lovers was celebrated one day, and on the morrow women attired as mourners, with streaming hair and bared breasts, bore the image of the dead Adonis to the sea-shore and committed it to the waves. Yet they sorrowed not without hope, for they sang that the lost one would come back again.<a href="#note_670" id="noteref_670" name="noteref_670"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">670</span></span></a> The date at which this Alexandrian ceremony was observed is not expressly stated; but from the mention of the ripe fruits it has been inferred that it took place in late summer.<a href="#note_671" id="noteref_671" name="noteref_671"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">671</span></span></a> In the great Phoenician sanctuary of Astarte at Byblus the death of Adonis was annually mourned, to the shrill wailing notes of the flute, with weeping, lamentation, and beating of the breast; but next day he was believed to come to life again and ascend up to heaven in the presence of his worshippers. The disconsolate believers, left behind on earth, shaved their heads as the Egyptians did on the death of the divine bull Apis; women who could not bring themselves to sacrifice their beautiful tresses had to give themselves up to strangers on a certain day of the festival, and to dedicate to Astarte the wages of their shame.<a href="#note_672" id="noteref_672" name="noteref_672"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">672</span></span></a></p>
				<p>This Phoenician festival appears to have been a vernal one, for its date was determined by the discoloration of the river Adonis, and this has been observed by modern travellers to occur in spring. At that season the red earth washed down from the mountains by the rain tinges the water of the river, and even the sea, for a great way with a blood-red hue, and the crimson stain was believed to be the blood of Adonis, annually wounded to death by the boar on Mount Lebanon.<a href="#note_673" id="noteref_673" name="noteref_673"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">673</span></span></a> Again, the scarlet anemone is said to have sprung from the blood of Adonis, or to have been stained by it;<a href="#note_674" id="noteref_674" name="noteref_674"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">674</span></span></a> and as the anemone blooms in Syria about Easter, this may be thought to show that the festival of Adonis, or at least one of his festivals, was held in spring. The name of the flower is probably derived from Naaman (<span class="tei tei-q">“darling”</span>), which seems to have been an epithet of Adonis. The Arabs still call the anemone <span class="tei tei-q">“wounds of the Naaman.”</span><a href="#note_675" id="noteref_675" name="noteref_675"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">675</span></span></a> The red rose also was said to owe its hue to the same sad occasion; for Aphrodite, hastening to her wounded lover, trod on a bush of white roses; the cruel thorns tore her tender flesh, and her sacred blood dyed the white roses for ever red.<a href="#note_676" id="noteref_676" name="noteref_676"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">676</span></span></a> It would be idle, perhaps, to lay much weight on evidence drawn from the calendar of flowers, and in particular to press an argument so fragile as the bloom of the rose. Yet so far as it counts at all, the tale which links the damask rose with the death of Adonis points to a summer rather than to a spring celebration of his passion. In Attica, certainly, the festival fell at the height of summer. For the fleet which Athens fitted out against Syracuse, and by the destruction of which her power was permanently crippled, sailed at midsummer, and by an ominous coincidence the sombre rites of Adonis were being celebrated at the very time. As the troops marched down to the harbour to embark, the streets through which they passed were lined with coffins and corpse-like effigies, and the air was rent with the noise of women wailing for the dead Adonis. The circumstance cast a gloom over the sailing of the most splendid armament that Athens ever sent to sea.<a href="#note_677" id="noteref_677" name="noteref_677"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">677</span></span></a> Many ages afterwards, when the Emperor Julian made his first entry into Antioch, he found in like manner the gay, the luxurious capital of the East plunged in mimic grief for the annual death of Adonis: and if he had any presentiment of coming evil, the voices of lamentation which struck upon his ear must have seemed to sound his knell.<a href="#note_678" id="noteref_678" name="noteref_678"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">678</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The resemblance of these ceremonies to the Indian and European ceremonies which I have described elsewhere is obvious. In particular, apart from the somewhat doubtful date of its celebration, the Alexandrian ceremony is almost identical with the Indian.<a href="#note_679" id="noteref_679" name="noteref_679"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">679</span></span></a> In both of them the marriage of two divine beings, whose affinity with vegetation seems indicated by the fresh plants with which they are surrounded, is celebrated in effigy, and the effigies are afterwards mourned over and thrown into the water.<a href="#note_680" id="noteref_680" name="noteref_680"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">680</span></span></a> From the similarity of these customs to each other and to the spring and midsummer customs of modern Europe we should naturally expect that they all admit of a common explanation. Hence, if the explanation which I have adopted of the latter is correct, the ceremony of the death and resurrection of Adonis must also have been a dramatic representation of the decay and revival of plant life. The inference thus based on the resemblance of the customs is confirmed by the following features in the legend and ritual of Adonis. His affinity with vegetation comes out at once in the common story of his birth. He was said to have been born from a myrrh-tree, the bark of which bursting, after a ten month' gestation, allowed the lovely infant to come forth. According to some, a boar rent the bark with his tusk and so opened a passage for the babe. A faint rationalistic colour was given to the legend by saying that his mother was a woman named Myrrh, who had been turned into a myrrh-tree soon after she had conceived the child.<a href="#note_681" id="noteref_681" name="noteref_681"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">681</span></span></a> The use of myrrh as incense at the festival of Adonis may have given rise to the fable.<a href="#note_682" id="noteref_682" name="noteref_682"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">682</span></span></a> We have seen that incense was burnt at the corresponding Babylonian rites,<a href="#note_683" id="noteref_683" name="noteref_683"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">683</span></span></a> just as it was burnt by the idolatrous Hebrews in honour of the Queen of Heaven,<a href="#note_684" id="noteref_684" name="noteref_684"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">684</span></span></a> who was no other than Astarte. Again, the story that Adonis spent half, or according to others a third, of the year in the lower world and the rest of it in the upper world,<a href="#note_685" id="noteref_685" name="noteref_685"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">685</span></span></a> is explained most simply and naturally by supposing that he represented vegetation, especially the corn, which lies buried in earth half the year and reappears above ground the other half. Certainly of the annual phenomena of nature there is none which suggests so obviously the idea of death and resurrection as the disappearance and reappearance of vegetation in autumn and spring. Adonis has been taken for the sun; but there is nothing in the sun's annual course within the temperate and tropical zones to suggest that he is dead for half or a third of the year and alive for the other half or two-thirds. He might, indeed, be conceived as weakened in winter, but dead he could not be thought to be; his daily reappearance contradicts the supposition.<a href="#note_686" id="noteref_686" name="noteref_686"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">686</span></span></a> Within the Arctic Circle, where the sun annually disappears for a continuous period which varies from twenty-four hours to six months according to the latitude, his yearly death and resurrection would certainly be an obvious idea; but no one except the unfortunate astronomer Bailly<a href="#note_687" id="noteref_687" name="noteref_687"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">687</span></span></a> has maintained that the Adonis worship came from the Arctic regions. On the other hand, the annual death and revival of vegetation is a conception which readily presents itself to men in every stage of savagery and civilization; and the vastness of the scale on which this ever-recurring decay and regeneration takes place, together with man's intimate dependence on it for subsistence, combine to render it the most impressive annual occurrence in nature, at least within the temperate zones. It is no wonder that a phenomenon so important, so striking, and so universal should, by suggesting similar ideas, have given rise to similar rites in many lands. We may, therefore, accept as probable an explanation of the Adonis worship which accords so well with the facts of nature and with the analogy of similar rites in other lands. Moreover, the explanation is countenanced by a considerable body of opinion amongst the ancients themselves, who again and again interpreted the dying and reviving god as the reaped and sprouting grain.<a href="#note_688" id="noteref_688" name="noteref_688"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">688</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The character of Tammuz or Adonis as a corn-spirit comes out plainly in an account of his festival given by an Arabic writer of the tenth century. In describing the rites and sacrifices observed at the different seasons of the year by the heathen Syrians of Harran, he says: <span class="tei tei-q">“Tammuz (July). In the middle of this month is the festival of el-Bûgât, that is, of the weeping women, and this is the Tâ-uz festival, which is celebrated in honour of the god Tâ-uz. The women bewail him, because his lord slew him so cruelly, ground his bones in a mill, and then scattered them to the wind. The women (during this festival) eat nothing which has been ground in a mill, but limit their diet to steeped wheat, sweet vetches, dates, raisins, and the like.”</span><a href="#note_689" id="noteref_689" name="noteref_689"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">689</span></span></a> Tâ-uz, who is no other than Tammuz, is here like Burns's John Barleycorn—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">They wasted o'er a scorching flame</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 1.80em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The marrow of his bones;</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">But a miller us'd him worst of all—</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 1.80em">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">For he crush'd him between two stones.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>This concentration, so to say, of the nature of Adonis upon the cereal crops is characteristic of the stage of culture reached by his worshippers in historical times. They had left the nomadic life of the wandering hunter and herdsman far behind them; for ages they had been settled on the land, and had depended for their subsistence mainly on the products of tillage. The berries and roots of the wilderness, the grass of the pastures, which had been matters of vital importance to their ruder forefathers, were now of little moment to them: more and more their thoughts and energies were engrossed by the staple of their life, the corn; more and more accordingly the propitiation of the deities of fertility in general and of the corn-spirit in particular tended to become the central feature of their religion. The aim they set before themselves in celebrating the rites was thoroughly practical. It was no vague poetical sentiment which prompted them to hail with joy the rebirth of vegetation and to mourn its decline. Hunger, felt or feared, was the mainspring of the worship of Adonis.</p>
				<p>It has been suggested by Father Lagrange that the mourning for Adonis was essentially a harvest rite designed to propitiate the corn-god, who was then either perishing under the sickles of the reapers, or being trodden to death under the hoofs of the oxen on the threshing-floor. While the men slew him, the women wept crocodile tears at home to appease his natural indignation by a show of grief for his death.<a href="#note_690" id="noteref_690" name="noteref_690"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">690</span></span></a> The theory fits in well with the dates of the festivals, which fell in spring or summer; for spring and summer, not autumn, are the seasons of the barley and wheat harvests in the lands which, worshipped Adonis.<a href="#note_691" id="noteref_691" name="noteref_691"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">691</span></span></a> Further, the hypothesis is confirmed by the practice of the Egyptian reapers, who lamented, calling upon Isis, when they cut the first corn;<a href="#note_692" id="noteref_692" name="noteref_692"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">692</span></span></a> and it is recommended by the analogous customs of many hunting tribes, who testify great respect for the animals which they kill and eat.<a href="#note_693" id="noteref_693" name="noteref_693"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">693</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Thus interpreted the death of Adonis is not the natural decay of vegetation in general under the summer heat or the winter cold; it is the violent destruction of the corn by man, who cuts it down on the field, stamps it to pieces on the threshing-floor, and grinds it to powder in the mill. That this was indeed the principal aspect in which Adonis presented himself in later times to the agricultural peoples of the Levant, may be admitted; but whether from the beginning he had been the corn and nothing but the corn, may be doubted. At an earlier period he may have been to the herdsman, above all, the tender herbage which sprouts after rain, offering rich pasture to the lean and hungry cattle. Earlier still he may have embodied the spirit of the nuts and berries which the autumn woods yield to the savage hunter and his squaw. And just as the husbandman must propitiate the spirit of the corn which he consumes, so the herdsman must appease the spirit of the grass and leaves which his cattle munch, and the hunter must soothe the spirit of the roots which he digs, and of the fruits which he gathers from the bough. In all cases the propitiation of the injured and angry sprite would naturally comprise elaborate excuses and apologies, accompanied by loud lamentations at his decease whenever, through some deplorable accident or necessity, he happened to be murdered as well as robbed. Only we must bear in mind that the savage hunter and herdsman of those early days had probably not yet attained to the abstract idea of vegetation in general; and that accordingly, so far as Adonis existed for them at all, he must have been the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Adon</span></span> or lord of each individual tree and plant rather than a personification of vegetable life as a whole. Thus there would be as many Adonises as there were trees and shrubs, and each of them might expect to receive satisfaction for any damage done to his person or property. And year by year, when the trees were deciduous, every Adonis would seem to bleed to death with the red leaves of autumn and to come to life again with the fresh green of spring.</p>
				<p>We have seen reason to think that in early times Adonis was sometimes personated by a living man who died a violent death in the character of the god. Further, there is evidence which goes to show that among the agricultural peoples of the Eastern Mediterranean, the corn-spirit, by whatever name he was known, was often represented, year by year, by human victims slain on the harvest-field.<a href="#note_694" id="noteref_694" name="noteref_694"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">694</span></span></a> If that was so, it seems likely that the propitiation of the corn-spirit would tend to fuse to some extent with the worship of the dead. For the spirits of these victims might be thought to return to life in the ears which they had fattened with their blood, and to die a second death at the reaping of the corn. Now the ghosts of those who have perished by violence are surly and apt to wreak their vengeance on their slayers whenever an opportunity offers. Hence the attempt to appease the souls of the slaughtered victims would naturally blend, at least in the popular conception, with the attempt to pacify the slain corn-spirit. And as the dead came back in the sprouting corn, so they might be thought to return in the spring flowers, waked from their long sleep by the soft vernal airs. They had been laid to their rest under the sod. What more natural than to imagine that the violets and the hyacinths, the roses and the anemones, sprang from their dust, were empurpled or incarnadined by their blood, and contained some portion of their spirit?</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I sometimes think that never blows so red</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The Rose as where some buried Caesar bled;</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 3.60em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">That every Hyacinth the Garden wears</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Dropt in her Lap from some once lovely Head.</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And this reviving Herb whose tender Green</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fledges the River-Lip on which we lean—</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 3.60em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Ah, lean upon it lightly, for who knows</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">From what once lovely Lip it springs unseen?</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>In the summer after the battle of Landen, the most sanguinary battle of the seventeenth century in Europe, the earth, saturated with the blood of twenty thousand slain, broke forth into millions of poppies, and the traveller who passed that vast sheet of scarlet might well fancy that the earth had indeed given up her dead.<a href="#note_695" id="noteref_695" name="noteref_695"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">695</span></span></a> At Athens the great Commemoration of the Dead fell in spring about the middle of March, when the early flowers are in bloom. Then the dead were believed to rise from their graves and go about the streets, vainly endeavoring to enter the temples and the dwellings, which were barred against these perturbed spirits with ropes, buckthorn, and pitch. The name of the festival, according to the most obvious and natural interpretation, means the Festival of Flowers, and the title would fit well with the substance of the ceremonies if at that season the poor ghosts were indeed thought to creep from the narrow house with the opening flowers.<a href="#note_696" id="noteref_696" name="noteref_696"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">696</span></span></a> There may therefore be a measure of truth in the theory of Renan, who saw in the Adonis worship a dreamy voluptuous cult of death, conceived not as the King of Terrors, but as an insidious enchanter who lures his victims to himself and lulls them into an eternal sleep. The infinite charm of nature in the Lebanon, he thought, lends itself to religious emotions of this sensuous, visionary sort, hovering vaguely between pain and pleasure, between slumber and tears.<a href="#note_697" id="noteref_697" name="noteref_697"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">697</span></span></a> It would doubtless be a mistake to attribute to Syrian peasants the worship of a conception so purely abstract as that of death in general. Yet it may be true that in their simple minds the thought of the reviving spirit of vegetation was blent with the very concrete notion of the ghosts of the dead, who come to life again in spring days with the early flowers, with the tender green of the corn and the many-tinted blossoms of the trees. Thus their views of the death and resurrection of nature would be coloured by their views of the death and resurrection of man, by their personal sorrows and hopes and fears. In like manner we cannot doubt that Renan's theory of Adonis was itself deeply tinged by passionate memories, memories of the slumber akin to death which sealed his own eyes on the slopes of the Lebanon, memories of the sister who sleeps in the land of Adonis never again to wake with the anemones and the roses.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
