<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>I</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="division">
			<section id="chapter-5-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</h3>
					<h4 epub:type="title">Dionysus</h4>
				</hgroup>
				<p>In the preceding part of this work we saw that in antiquity the civilised nations of western Asia and Egypt pictured to themselves the changes of the seasons, and particularly the annual growth and decay of vegetation, as episodes in the life of gods, whose mournful death and happy resurrection they celebrated with dramatic rites of alternate lamentation and rejoicing. But if the celebration was in form dramatic, it was in substance magical; that is to say, it was intended, on the principles of sympathetic magic, to ensure the vernal regeneration of plants and the multiplication of animals, which had seemed to be menaced by the inroads of winter. In the ancient world, however, such ideas and such rites were by no means confined to the Oriental peoples of Babylon and Syria, of Phrygia and Egypt; they were not a product peculiar to the religious mysticism of the dreamy East, but were shared by the races of livelier fancy and more mercurial temperament who inhabited the shores and islands of the Aegean. We need not, with some enquirers in ancient and modern times, suppose that these Western peoples borrowed from the older civilisation of the Orient the conception of the Dying and Reviving God, together with the solemn ritual, in which that conception was dramatically set forth before the eyes of the worshippers. More probably the resemblance which may be traced in this respect between the religions of the East and the West is no more than what we commonly, though incorrectly, call a fortuitous coincidence, the effect of similar causes acting alike on the similar constitution of the human mind in different countries and under different skies. The Greek had no need to journey into far countries to learn the vicissitudes of the seasons, to mark the fleeting beauty of the damask rose, the transient glory of the golden corn, the passing splendour of the purple grapes. Year by year in his own beautiful land he beheld, with natural regret, the bright pomp of summer fading into the gloom and stagnation of winter, and year by year he hailed with natural delight the outburst of fresh life in spring. Accustomed to personify the forces of nature, to tinge her cold abstractions with the warm hues of imagination, to clothe her naked realities with the gorgeous drapery of a mythic fancy, he fashioned for himself a train of gods and goddesses, of spirits and elves, out of the shifting panorama of the seasons, and followed the annual fluctuations of their fortunes with alternate emotions of cheerfulness and dejection, of gladness and sorrow, which found their natural expression in alternate rites of rejoicing and lamentation, of revelry and mourning. A consideration of some of the Greek divinities who thus died and rose again from the dead may furnish us with a series of companion pictures to set side by side with the sad figures of Adonis, Attis, and Osiris. We begin with Dionysus.</p>
				<p>The god Dionysus or Bacchus is best known to us as a personification of the vine and of the exhilaration produced by the juice of the grape.<a href="#note_1" id="noteref_1" name="noteref_1"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1</span></span></a> His ecstatic worship, characterised by wild dances, thrilling music, and tipsy excess, appears to have originated among the rude tribes of Thrace, who were notoriously addicted to drunkenness.<a href="#note_2" id="noteref_2" name="noteref_2"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">2</span></span></a> Its mystic doctrines and extravagant rites were essentially foreign to the clear intelligence and sober temperament of the Greek race. Yet appealing as it did to that love of mystery and that proneness to revert to savagery which seem to be innate in most men, the religion spread like wildfire through Greece until the god whom Homer hardly deigned to notice had become the most popular figure of the pantheon. The resemblance which his story and his ceremonies present to those of Osiris have led some enquirers both in ancient and modern times to hold that Dionysus was merely a disguised Osiris, imported directly from Egypt into Greece.<a href="#note_3" id="noteref_3" name="noteref_3"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">3</span></span></a> But the great preponderance of evidence points to his Thracian origin, and the similarity of the two worships is sufficiently explained by the similarity of the ideas and customs on which they were founded.</p>
				<p>While the vine with its clusters was the most characteristic manifestation of Dionysus, he was also a god of trees in general. Thus we are told that almost all the Greeks sacrificed to <span class="tei tei-q">“Dionysus of the tree.”</span><a href="#note_4" id="noteref_4" name="noteref_4"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">4</span></span></a> In Boeotia one of his titles was <span class="tei tei-q">“Dionysus in the tree.”</span><a href="#note_5" id="noteref_5" name="noteref_5"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">5</span></span></a> His image was often merely an upright post, without arms, but draped in a mantle, with a bearded mask to represent the head, and with leafy boughs projecting from the head or body to shew the nature of the deity.<a href="#note_6" id="noteref_6" name="noteref_6"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">6</span></span></a> On a vase his rude effigy is depicted appearing out of a low tree or bush.<a href="#note_7" id="noteref_7" name="noteref_7"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">7</span></span></a> At Magnesia on the Maeander an image of Dionysus is said to have been found in a plane-tree, which had been broken by the wind.<a href="#note_8" id="noteref_8" name="noteref_8"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">8</span></span></a> He was the patron of cultivated trees;<a href="#note_9" id="noteref_9" name="noteref_9"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">9</span></span></a> prayers were offered to him that he would make the trees grow;<a href="#note_10" id="noteref_10" name="noteref_10"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">10</span></span></a> and he was especially honoured by husbandmen, chiefly fruit-growers, who set up an image of him, in the shape of a natural tree-stump, in their orchards.<a href="#note_11" id="noteref_11" name="noteref_11"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">11</span></span></a> He was said to have discovered all tree-fruits, amongst which apples and figs are particularly mentioned;<a href="#note_12" id="noteref_12" name="noteref_12"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">12</span></span></a> and he was referred to as <span class="tei tei-q">“well-fruited,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“he of the green fruit,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“making the fruit to grow.”</span><a href="#note_13" id="noteref_13" name="noteref_13"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">13</span></span></a> One of his titles was <span class="tei tei-q">“teeming”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“bursting”</span> (as of sap or blossoms);<a href="#note_14" id="noteref_14" name="noteref_14"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">14</span></span></a> and there was a Flowery Dionysus in Attica and at Patrae in Achaia.<a href="#note_15" id="noteref_15" name="noteref_15"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">15</span></span></a> The Athenians sacrificed to him for the prosperity of the fruits of the land.<a href="#note_16" id="noteref_16" name="noteref_16"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">16</span></span></a> Amongst the trees particularly sacred to him, in addition to the vine, was the pine-tree.<a href="#note_17" id="noteref_17" name="noteref_17"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">17</span></span></a> The Delphic oracle commanded the Corinthians to worship a particular pine-tree <span class="tei tei-q">“equally with the god,”</span> so they made two images of Dionysus out of it, with red faces and gilt bodies.<a href="#note_18" id="noteref_18" name="noteref_18"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">18</span></span></a> In art a wand, tipped with a pine-cone, is commonly carried by the god or his worshippers.<a href="#note_19" id="noteref_19" name="noteref_19"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">19</span></span></a> Again, the ivy and the fig-tree were especially associated with him. In the Attic township of Acharnae there was a Dionysus Ivy;<a href="#note_20" id="noteref_20" name="noteref_20"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">20</span></span></a> at Lacedaemon there was a Fig Dionysus; and in Naxos, where figs were called <i xml:lang="el">meilicha</i>, there was a Dionysus Meilichios, the face of whose image was made of fig-wood.<a href="#note_21" id="noteref_21" name="noteref_21"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">21</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Further, there are indications, few but significant, that Dionysus was conceived as a deity of agriculture and the corn. He is spoken of as himself doing the work of a husbandman:<a href="#note_22" id="noteref_22" name="noteref_22"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">22</span></span></a> he is reported to have been the first to yoke oxen to the plough, which before had been dragged by hand alone; and some people found in this tradition the clue to the bovine shape in which, as we shall see, the god was often supposed to present himself to his worshippers. Thus guiding the ploughshare and scattering the seed as he went, Dionysus is said to have eased the labour of the husbandman.<a href="#note_23" id="noteref_23" name="noteref_23"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">23</span></span></a> Further, we are told that in the land of the Bisaltae, a Thracian tribe, there was a great and fair sanctuary of Dionysus, where at his festival a bright light shone forth at night as a token of an abundant harvest vouchsafed by the deity; but if the crops were to fail that year, the mystic light was not seen, darkness brooded over the sanctuary as at other times.<a href="#note_24" id="noteref_24" name="noteref_24"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">24</span></span></a> Moreover, among the emblems of Dionysus was the winnowing-fan, that is the large open shovel-shaped basket, which down to modern times has been used by farmers to separate the grain from the chaff by tossing the corn in the air. This simple agricultural instrument figured in the mystic rites of Dionysus; indeed the god is traditionally said to have been placed at birth in a winnowing-fan as in a cradle: in art he is represented as an infant so cradled; and from these traditions and representations he derived the epithet of <i>Liknites</i>, that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“He of the Winnowing-fan.”</span><a href="#note_25" id="noteref_25" name="noteref_25"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">25</span></span></a></p>
				<p>At first sight this symbolism might be explained very simply and naturally by supposing that the divine infant cradled in the winnowing-fan was identified with the corn which it is the function of the instrument to winnow and sift. Yet against this identification it may be urged with reason that the use of a winnowing-fan as a cradle was not peculiar to Dionysus; it was a regular practice with the ancient Greeks to place their infants in winnowing-fans as an omen of wealth and fertility for the future life of the children.<a href="#note_26" id="noteref_26" name="noteref_26"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">26</span></span></a> Customs of the same sort have been observed, apparently for similar reasons, by other peoples in other lands. For example, in Java it is or used to be customary to place every child at birth in a bamboo basket like the sieve or winnowing-basket which Javanese farmers use for separating the rice from the chaff.<a href="#note_27" id="noteref_27" name="noteref_27"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">27</span></span></a> It is the midwife who places the child in the basket, and as she does so she suddenly knocks with the palms of both hands on the basket in order that the child may not be timid and fearful. Then she addresses the child thus: <span class="tei tei-q">“Cry not, for Njaï-among and Kaki-among”</span> (two spirits) <span class="tei tei-q">“are watching over you.”</span> Next she addresses these two spirits, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bring not your grandchild to the road, lest he be trampled by a horse; bring him not to the bank of the river, lest he fall into the river.”</span> The object of the ceremony is said to be that these two spirits should always and everywhere guard the child.<a href="#note_28" id="noteref_28" name="noteref_28"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">28</span></span></a> On the first anniversary of a child's birthday the Chinese of Foo-Chow set the little one in a large bamboo sieve, such as farmers employ in winnowing grain, and in the sieve they place along with the child a variety of articles, such as fruits, gold or silver ornaments, a set of money-scales, books, a pencil, pen, ink, paper, and so on, and they draw omens of the child's future career from the object which it first handles and plays with. Thus, if the infant first grasps the money-scale, he will be wealthy; if he seizes on a book, he will be learned, and so forth.<a href="#note_29" id="noteref_29" name="noteref_29"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">29</span></span></a> In the Bilaspore district of India it is customary for well-to-do people to place a newborn infant in a winnowing-fan filled with rice and afterwards to give the grain to the nurse in attendance.<a href="#note_30" id="noteref_30" name="noteref_30"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">30</span></span></a> In Upper Egypt a newly-born babe is immediately laid upon a corn-sieve and corn is scattered around it; moreover, on the seventh day after birth the infant is carried on a sieve through the whole house, while the midwife scatters wheat, barley, pease and salt. The intention of these ceremonies is said to be to avert evil spirits from the child,<a href="#note_31" id="noteref_31" name="noteref_31"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">31</span></span></a> and a like motive is assigned by other peoples for the practice of placing newborn infants in a winnowing-basket or corn-sieve. For example, in the Punjaub, when several children of a family have died in succession, a new baby will sometimes be put at birth into an old winnowing-basket (<i>chhaj</i>) along with the sweepings of the house, and so dragged out into the yard; such a child may, like Dionysus, in after life be known by the name of Winnowing-basket (<i>Chhajju</i>) or Dragged (<i>Ghasitâ</i>).<a href="#note_32" id="noteref_32" name="noteref_32"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">32</span></span></a> The object of treating the child in this way seems to be to save its life by deceiving the spirits, who are supposed to have carried off its elder brothers and sisters; these malevolent beings are on the look-out for the new baby, but they will never think of raking for it in the dust-bin, that being the last place where they would expect to find the hope of the family. The same may perhaps be the intention of a ceremony observed by the Gaolis of the Deccan. As soon as a child is born, it is bathed and then placed on a sieve for a few minutes. On the fifth day the sieve, with a lime and <i>pan</i> leaves on it, is removed outside the house and then, after the worship of Chetti has been performed, the sieve is thrown away on the road.<a href="#note_33" id="noteref_33" name="noteref_33"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">33</span></span></a> Again, the same notion of rescuing the child from dangerous spirits comes out very clearly in a similar custom observed by the natives of Laos, a province of Siam. These people <span class="tei tei-q">“believe that an infant is the child, not of its parents, but of the spirits, and in this belief they go through the following formalities. As soon as an infant is born it is bathed and dressed, laid upon a rice-sieve, and placed—by the grandmother if present, if not, by the next near female relative—at the head of the stairs or of the ladder leading to the house. The person performing this duty calls out in a loud tone to the spirits to come and take the child away to-day, or for ever after to let it alone; at the same moment she stamps violently on the floor to frighten the child, or give it a jerk, and make it cry. If it does not cry this is regarded as an evil omen. If, on the other hand, it follows the ordinary laws of nature and begins to exercise its vocal organs, it is supposed to have a happy and prosperous life before it. Sometimes the spirits do come and take the infant away, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span> it dies before it is twenty-four hours old, but, to prevent such a calamity, strings are tied round its wrists on the first night after its birth, and if it sickens or is feeble the spirit-doctors are called in to prescribe certain offerings to be made to keep away the very spirits who, only a few hours previously, were ceremoniously called upon to come and carry the child off. On the day after its birth the child is regarded as being the property no longer of the spirits, who could have taken it if they had wanted it, but of the parents, who forthwith sell it to some relation for a nominal sum—an eighth or a quarter of a rupee perhaps. This again is a further guarantee against molestation by the spirits, who apparently are regarded as honest folk that would not stoop to take what has been bought and paid for.”</span><a href="#note_34" id="noteref_34" name="noteref_34"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">34</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A like intention of averting evil in some shape from a child is assigned in other cases of the same custom. Thus in Travancore, <span class="tei tei-q">“if an infant is observed to distort its limbs as if in pain, it is supposed to be under the pressure of some one who has stooped over it, to relieve which the mother places it with a nut-cracker on a winnowing fan and shakes it three or four times.”</span><a href="#note_35" id="noteref_35" name="noteref_35"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">35</span></span></a> Again, among the Tanala people of Madagascar almost all children born in the unlucky month of Faosa are buried alive in the forest. But if the parents resolve to let the child live, they must call in the aid of a diviner, who performs a ceremony for averting the threatened ill-luck. The child is placed in a winnowing-fan along with certain herbs. Further, the diviner takes herbs of the same sort, a worn-out spade, and an axe, fastens them to the father's spear, and sets the spear up in the ground. Then the child is bathed in water which has been medicated with some of the same herbs. Finally the diviner says: <span class="tei tei-q">“The worn-out spade to the grandchild; may it (the child) not despoil its father, may it not despoil its mother, may it not despoil the children; let it be good.”</span> This ceremony, we are told, <span class="tei tei-q">“puts an end to the child's evil days, and the father gets the spear to put away all evil. The child then joins its father and mother; its evil days are averted, and the water and the other things are buried, for they account them evil.”</span><a href="#note_36" id="noteref_36" name="noteref_36"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">36</span></span></a> Similarly the ancient Greeks used to bury, or throw into the sea, or deposit at cross-roads, the things that had been used in ceremonies of purification, no doubt because the things were supposed to be tainted by the evil which had been transferred to them in the rites.<a href="#note_37" id="noteref_37" name="noteref_37"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">37</span></span></a> Another example of the use of a winnowing-fan in what may be called a purificatory ceremony is furnished by the practice of the Chinese of Foo-Chow. A lad who is suffering from small-pox is made to squat in a large winnowing sieve. On his head is placed a piece of red cloth, and on the cloth are laid some parched beans, which are then allowed to roll off. As the name for beans, pronounced in the local dialect, is identical with the common name for small-pox, and as moreover the scars left by the pustules are thought to resemble beans, it appears to be imagined that just as the beans roll off the boy's head, so will the pustules vanish from his body without leaving a trace behind.<a href="#note_38" id="noteref_38" name="noteref_38"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">38</span></span></a> Thus the cure depends on the principle of homoeopathic magic. Perhaps on the same principle a winnowing-fan is employed in the ceremony from a notion that it will help to waft or fan away the disease like chaff from the grain. We may compare a purificatory ceremony observed by the Karens of Burma at the naming of a new-born child. Amongst these people <span class="tei tei-q">“children are supposed to come into the world defiled, and unless that defilement is removed, they will be unfortunate, and unsuccessful in their undertakings. An Elder takes a thin splint of bamboo, and, tying a noose at one end, he fans it down the child's arm, saying:</span></p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away ill luck, fan away ill success:</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away inability, fan away unskilfulness:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away slow growth, fan away difficulty of growth:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away stuntedness, fan away puniness:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away drowsiness, fan away stupidity:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away debasedness, fan away wretchedness:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 7.20em">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan away the whole completely.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>
					<span class="tei tei-q">“The Elder now changes his motion and fans up the child's arm, saying:</span>
				</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan on power, fan on influence:</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan on the paddy bin, fan on the paddy barn:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan on followers, fan on dependants:</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Fan on good things, fan on appropriate things.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span><a href="#note_39" id="noteref_39" name="noteref_39">
								<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">39</span>
								</span>
							</a>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>Thus in some of the foregoing instances the employment of the winnowing-fan may have been suggested by the proper use of the implement as a means of separating the corn from the chaff, the same operation being extended by analogy to rid men of evils of various sorts which would otherwise adhere to them like husks to the grain. It was in this way that the ancients explained the use of the winnowing-fan in the mysteries.<a href="#note_40" id="noteref_40" name="noteref_40"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">40</span></span></a> But one motive, and perhaps the original one, for setting a newborn child in a winnowing-fan and surrounding it with corn was probably the wish to communicate to the infant, on the principle of sympathetic magic, the fertility and especially the power of growth possessed by the grain. This was in substance the explanation which W. Mannhardt gave of the custom.<a href="#note_41" id="noteref_41" name="noteref_41"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">41</span></span></a> He rightly insisted on the analogy which many peoples, and in particular the ancient Greeks, have traced between the sowing of seed and the begetting of children,<a href="#note_42" id="noteref_42" name="noteref_42"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">42</span></span></a> and he confirmed his view of the function of the winnowing-fan in these ceremonies by aptly comparing a German custom of sowing barley or flax seed over weakly and stunted children in the belief that this will make them grow with the growth of the barley or the flax.<a href="#note_43" id="noteref_43" name="noteref_43"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">43</span></span></a> An Esthonian mode of accomplishing the same object is to set the child in the middle of a plot of ground where a sower is sowing hemp and to leave the little one there till the sowing is finished; after that they imagine that the child will shoot up in stature like the hemp which has just been sown.<a href="#note_44" id="noteref_44" name="noteref_44"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">44</span></span></a></p>
				<p>With the foregoing evidence before us of a widespread custom of placing newborn children in winnowing-fans we clearly cannot argue that Dionysus must necessarily have been a god of the corn because Greek tradition and Greek art represent him as an infant cradled in a winnowing-fan. The argument would prove too much, for it would apply equally to all the infants that have been so cradled in all parts of the world. We cannot even press the argument drawn from the surname <span class="tei tei-q">“He of the Winnowing-fan”</span> which was borne by Dionysus, since we have seen that similar names are borne for similar reasons in India by persons who have no claim whatever to be regarded as deities of the corn. Yet when all necessary deductions have been made on this score, the association of Dionysus with the winnowing-fan appears to be too intimate to be explained away as a mere reminiscence of a practice to which every Greek baby, whether human or divine, had to submit. That practice would hardly account either for the use of the winnowing-fan in the mysteries or for the appearance of the implement, filled with fruitage of various kinds, on the monuments which set forth the ritual of Dionysus.<a href="#note_45" id="noteref_45" name="noteref_45"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">45</span></span></a> This last emblem points plainly to a conception of the god as a personification of the fruits of the earth in general; and as if to emphasise the idea of fecundity conveyed by such a symbol there sometimes appears among the fruits in the winnowing-fan an effigy of the male organ of generation. The prominent place which that effigy occupied in the worship of Dionysus<a href="#note_46" id="noteref_46" name="noteref_46"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">46</span></span></a> hints broadly, if it does not strictly prove, that to the Greek mind the god stood for the powers of fertility in general, animal as well as vegetable. In the thought of the ancients no sharp line of distinction divided the fertility of animals from the fertility of plants; rather the two ideas met and blended in a nebulous haze. We need not wonder, therefore, that the same coarse but expressive emblem figured conspicuously in the ritual of Father Liber, the Italian counterpart of Dionysus, who in return for the homage paid to the symbol of his creative energy was believed to foster the growth of the crops and to guard the fields against the powers of evil.<a href="#note_47" id="noteref_47" name="noteref_47"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">47</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Like the other gods of vegetation whom we considered in the last volume, Dionysus was believed to have died a violent death, but to have been brought to life again; and his sufferings, death, and resurrection were enacted in his sacred rites. His tragic story is thus told by the poet Nonnus. Zeus in the form of a serpent visited Persephone, and she bore him Zagreus, that is, Dionysus, a horned infant. Scarcely was he born, when the babe mounted the throne of his father Zeus and mimicked the great god by brandishing the lightning in his tiny hand. But he did not occupy the throne long; for the treacherous Titans, their faces whitened with chalk, attacked him with knives while he was looking at himself in a mirror. For a time he evaded their assaults by turning himself into various shapes, assuming the likeness successively of Zeus and Cronus, of a young man, of a lion, a horse, and a serpent. Finally, in the form of a bull, he was cut to pieces by the murderous knives of his enemies.<a href="#note_48" id="noteref_48" name="noteref_48"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">48</span></span></a> His Cretan myth, as related by Firmicus Maternus, ran thus. He was said to have been the bastard son of Jupiter, a Cretan king. Going abroad, Jupiter transferred the throne and sceptre to the youthful Dionysus, but, knowing that his wife Juno cherished a jealous dislike of the child, he entrusted Dionysus to the care of guards upon whose fidelity he believed he could rely. Juno, however, bribed the guards, and amusing the child with rattles and a cunningly-wrought looking-glass lured him into an ambush, where her satellites, the Titans, rushed upon him, cut him limb from limb, boiled his body with various herbs, and ate it. But his sister Minerva, who had shared in the deed, kept his heart and gave it to Jupiter on his return, revealing to him the whole history of the crime. In his rage, Jupiter put the Titans to death by torture, and, to soothe his grief for the loss of his son, made an image in which he enclosed the child's heart, and then built a temple in his honour.<a href="#note_49" id="noteref_49" name="noteref_49"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">49</span></span></a> In this version a Euhemeristic turn has been given to the myth by representing Jupiter and Juno (Zeus and Hera) as a king and queen of Crete. The guards referred to are the mythical Curetes who danced a war-dance round the infant Dionysus, as they are said to have done round the infant Zeus.<a href="#note_50" id="noteref_50" name="noteref_50"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">50</span></span></a> Very noteworthy is the legend, recorded both by Nonnus and Firmicus, that in his infancy Dionysus occupied for a short time the throne of his father Zeus. So Proclus tells us that <span class="tei tei-q">“Dionysus was the last king of the gods appointed by Zeus. For his father set him on the kingly throne, and placed in his hand the sceptre, and made him king of all the gods of the world.”</span><a href="#note_51" id="noteref_51" name="noteref_51"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">51</span></span></a> Such traditions point to a custom of temporarily investing the king's son with the royal dignity as a preliminary to sacrificing him instead of his father. Pomegranates were supposed to have sprung from the blood of Dionysus, as anemones from the blood of Adonis and violets from the blood of Attis: hence women refrained from eating seeds of pomegranates at the festival of the Thesmophoria.<a href="#note_52" id="noteref_52" name="noteref_52"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">52</span></span></a> According to some, the severed limbs of Dionysus were pieced together, at the command of Zeus, by Apollo, who buried them on Parnassus.<a href="#note_53" id="noteref_53" name="noteref_53"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">53</span></span></a> The grave of Dionysus was shewn in the Delphic temple beside a golden statue of Apollo.<a href="#note_54" id="noteref_54" name="noteref_54"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">54</span></span></a> However, according to another account, the grave of Dionysus was at Thebes, where he is said to have been torn in pieces.<a href="#note_55" id="noteref_55" name="noteref_55"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">55</span></span></a> Thus far the resurrection of the slain god is not mentioned, but in other versions of the myth it is variously related. According to one version, which represented Dionysus as a son of Zeus and Demeter, his mother pieced together his mangled limbs and made him young again.<a href="#note_56" id="noteref_56" name="noteref_56"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">56</span></span></a> In others it is simply said that shortly after his burial he rose from the dead and ascended up to heaven;<a href="#note_57" id="noteref_57" name="noteref_57"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">57</span></span></a> or that Zeus raised him up as he lay mortally wounded;<a href="#note_58" id="noteref_58" name="noteref_58"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">58</span></span></a> or that Zeus swallowed the heart of Dionysus and then begat him afresh by Semele,<a href="#note_59" id="noteref_59" name="noteref_59"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">59</span></span></a> who in the common legend figures as mother of Dionysus. Or, again, the heart was pounded up and given in a portion to Semele, who thereby conceived him.<a href="#note_60" id="noteref_60" name="noteref_60"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">60</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Turning from the myth to the ritual, we find that the Cretans celebrated a biennial<a href="#note_61" id="noteref_61" name="noteref_61"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">61</span></span></a> festival at which the passion of Dionysus was represented in every detail. All that he had done or suffered in his last moments was enacted before the eyes of his worshippers, who tore a live bull to pieces with their teeth and roamed the woods with frantic shouts. In front of them was carried a casket supposed to contain the sacred heart of Dionysus, and to the wild music of flutes and cymbals they mimicked the rattles by which the infant god had been lured to his doom.<a href="#note_62" id="noteref_62" name="noteref_62"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">62</span></span></a> Where the resurrection formed part of the myth, it also was acted at the rites,<a href="#note_63" id="noteref_63" name="noteref_63"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">63</span></span></a> and it even appears that a general doctrine of resurrection, or at least of immortality, was inculcated on the worshippers; for Plutarch, writing to console his wife on the death of their infant daughter, comforts her with the thought of the immortality of the soul as taught by tradition and revealed in the mysteries of Dionysus.<a href="#note_64" id="noteref_64" name="noteref_64"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">64</span></span></a> A different form of the myth of the death and resurrection of Dionysus is that he descended into Hades to bring up his mother Semele from the dead.<a href="#note_65" id="noteref_65" name="noteref_65"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">65</span></span></a> The local Argive tradition was that he went down through the Alcyonian lake; and his return from the lower world, in other words his resurrection, was annually celebrated on the spot by the Argives, who summoned him from the water by trumpet blasts, while they threw a lamb into the lake as an offering to the warder of the dead.<a href="#note_66" id="noteref_66" name="noteref_66"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">66</span></span></a> Whether this was a spring festival does not appear, but the Lydians certainly celebrated the advent of Dionysus in spring; the god was supposed to bring the season with him.<a href="#note_67" id="noteref_67" name="noteref_67"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">67</span></span></a> Deities of vegetation, who are supposed to pass a certain portion of each year under ground, naturally come to be regarded as gods of the lower world or of the dead. Both Dionysus and Osiris were so conceived.<a href="#note_68" id="noteref_68" name="noteref_68"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">68</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A feature in the mythical character of Dionysus, which at first sight appears inconsistent with his nature as a deity of vegetation, is that he was often conceived and represented in animal shape, especially in the form, or at least with the horns, of a bull. Thus he is spoken of as <span class="tei tei-q">“cow-born,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“bull,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“bull-shaped,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“bull-faced,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“bull-browed,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“bull-horned,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“horn-bearing,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“two-horned,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“horned.”</span><a href="#note_69" id="noteref_69" name="noteref_69"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">69</span></span></a> He was believed to appear, at least occasionally, as a bull.<a href="#note_70" id="noteref_70" name="noteref_70"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">70</span></span></a> His images were often, as at Cyzicus, made in bull shape,<a href="#note_71" id="noteref_71" name="noteref_71"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">71</span></span></a> or with bull horns;<a href="#note_72" id="noteref_72" name="noteref_72"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">72</span></span></a> and he was painted with horns.<a href="#note_73" id="noteref_73" name="noteref_73"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">73</span></span></a> Types of the horned Dionysus are found amongst the surviving monuments of antiquity.<a href="#note_74" id="noteref_74" name="noteref_74"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">74</span></span></a> On one statuette he appears clad in a bull's hide, the head, horns, and hoofs hanging down behind.<a href="#note_75" id="noteref_75" name="noteref_75"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">75</span></span></a> Again, he is represented as a child with clusters of grapes round his brow, and a calf's head, with sprouting horns, attached to the back of his head.<a href="#note_76" id="noteref_76" name="noteref_76"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">76</span></span></a> On a red-figured vase the god is portrayed as a calf-headed child seated on a woman's lap.<a href="#note_77" id="noteref_77" name="noteref_77"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">77</span></span></a> The people of Cynaetha in north-western Arcadia held a festival of Dionysus in winter, when men, who had greased their bodies with oil for the occasion, used to pick out a bull from the herd and carry it to the sanctuary of the god. Dionysus was supposed to inspire their choice of the particular bull,<a href="#note_78" id="noteref_78" name="noteref_78"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">78</span></span></a> which probably represented the deity himself; for at his festivals he was believed to appear in bull form. The women of Elis hailed him as a bull, and prayed him to come with his bull's foot. They sang, <span class="tei tei-q">“Come hither, Dionysus, to thy holy temple by the sea; come with the Graces to thy temple, rushing with thy bull's foot, O goodly bull, O goodly bull!”</span><a href="#note_79" id="noteref_79" name="noteref_79"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">79</span></span></a> The Bacchanals of Thrace wore horns in imitation of their god.<a href="#note_80" id="noteref_80" name="noteref_80"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">80</span></span></a> According to the myth, it was in the shape of a bull that he was torn to pieces by the Titans;<a href="#note_81" id="noteref_81" name="noteref_81"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">81</span></span></a> and the Cretans, when they acted the sufferings and death of Dionysus, tore a live bull to pieces with their teeth.<a href="#note_82" id="noteref_82" name="noteref_82"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">82</span></span></a> Indeed, the rending and devouring of live bulls and calves appear to have been a regular feature of the Dionysiac rites.<a href="#note_83" id="noteref_83" name="noteref_83"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">83</span></span></a> When we consider the practice of portraying the god as a bull or with some of the features of the animal, the belief that he appeared in bull form to his worshippers at the sacred rites, and the legend that in bull form he had been torn in pieces, we cannot doubt that in rending and devouring a live bull at his festival the worshippers of Dionysus believed themselves to be killing the god, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood.</p>
				<p>Another animal whose form Dionysus assumed was the goat. One of his names was <span class="tei tei-q">“Kid.”</span><a href="#note_84" id="noteref_84" name="noteref_84"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">84</span></span></a> At Athens and at Hermion he was worshipped under the title of <span class="tei tei-q">“the one of the Black Goatskin,”</span> and a legend ran that on a certain occasion he had appeared clad in the skin from which he took the title.<a href="#note_85" id="noteref_85" name="noteref_85"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">85</span></span></a> In the wine-growing district of Phlius, where in autumn the plain is still thickly mantled with the red and golden foliage of the fading vines, there stood of old a bronze image of a goat, which the husbandmen plastered with gold-leaf as a means of protecting their vines against blight.<a href="#note_86" id="noteref_86" name="noteref_86"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">86</span></span></a> The image probably represented the vine-god himself. To save him from the wrath of Hera, his father Zeus changed the youthful Dionysus into a kid;<a href="#note_87" id="noteref_87" name="noteref_87"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">87</span></span></a> and when the gods fled to Egypt to escape the fury of Typhon, Dionysus was turned into a goat.<a href="#note_88" id="noteref_88" name="noteref_88"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">88</span></span></a> Hence when his worshippers rent in pieces a live goat and devoured it raw,<a href="#note_89" id="noteref_89" name="noteref_89"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">89</span></span></a> they must have believed that they were eating the body and blood of the god.</p>
				<p>The custom of tearing in pieces the bodies of animals and of men and then devouring them raw has been practised as a religious rite by savages in modern times. We need not therefore dismiss as a fable the testimony of antiquity to the observance of similar rites among the frenzied worshippers of Bacchus. An English missionary to the Coast Indians of British Columbia has thus described a scene like the cannibal orgies of the Bacchanals. After mentioning that an old chief had ordered a female slave to be dragged to the beach, murdered, and thrown into the water, he proceeds as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“I did not see the murder, but, immediately after, I saw crowds of people running out of those houses near to where the corpse was thrown, and forming themselves into groups at a good distance away. This I learnt was from fear of what was to follow. Presently two bands of furious wretches appeared, each headed by a man in a state of nudity. They gave vent to the most unearthly sounds, and the two naked men made themselves look as unearthly as possible, proceeding in a creeping kind of stoop, and stepping like two proud horses, at the same time shooting forward each arm alternately, which they held out at full length for a little time in the most defiant manner. Besides this, the continual jerking their heads back, causing their long black hair to twist about, added much to their savage appearance. For some time they pretended to be seeking the body, and the instant they came where it lay they commenced screaming and rushing round it like so many angry wolves. Finally they seized it, dragged it out of the water, and laid it on the beach, where I was told the naked men would commence tearing it to pieces with their teeth. The two bands of men immediately surrounded them, and so hid their horrid work. In a few minutes the crowd broke into two, when each of the naked cannibals appeared with half of the body in his hands. Separating a few yards, they commenced, amid horrid yells, their still more horrid feast. The sight was too terrible to behold. I left the gallery with a depressed heart. I may mention that the two bands of savages just alluded to belong to that class which the whites term <span class="tei tei-q">‘medicine-men.’</span> ”</span> The same writer informs us that at the winter ceremonials of these Indians <span class="tei tei-q">“the cannibal, on such occasions, is generally supplied with two, three, or four human bodies, which he tears to pieces before his audience. Several persons, either from bravado or as a charm, present their arms for him to bite. I have seen several whom he has bitten, and I hear two have died from the effects.”</span> And when corpses were not forthcoming, these cannibals apparently seized and devoured living people. Mr. Duncan has seen hundreds of the Tsimshian Indians sitting in their canoes which they had just pushed off from the shore in order to escape being torn to pieces by a party of prowling cannibals. Others of these Indians contented themselves with tearing dogs to pieces, while their attendants kept up a growling noise, or a whoop, <span class="tei tei-q">“which was seconded by a screeching noise made from an instrument which they believe to be the abode of a spirit.”</span><a href="#note_90" id="noteref_90" name="noteref_90"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">90</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Mr. Duncan's account of these savage rites has been fully borne out by later observation. Among the Kwakiutl Indians the Cannibals (<i>Hamatsas</i>) are the highest in rank of the Secret Societies. They devour corpses, bite pieces out of living people, and formerly ate slaves who had been killed for the purpose. But when their fury has subsided, they are obliged to pay compensation to the persons whom they have bitten and to the owners of slaves whom they have killed. The indemnity consists sometimes of blankets, sometimes of canoes. In the latter case the tariff is fixed: one bite, one canoe. For some time after eating human flesh the cannibal has to observe a great many rules, which regulate his eating and drinking, his going out and his coming in, his clothing and his intercourse with his wife.<a href="#note_91" id="noteref_91" name="noteref_91"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">91</span></span></a> Similar customs prevail among other tribes of the same coast, such as the Bella Coola, the Tsimshian, the Niska, and the Nootka. In the Nootka tribe members of the Panther Society tear dogs to pieces and devour them. They wear masks armed with canine teeth.<a href="#note_92" id="noteref_92" name="noteref_92"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">92</span></span></a> So among the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands there is one religion of cannibalism and another of dog-eating. The cannibals in a state of frenzy, real or pretended, bite flesh out of the extended arms of their fellow villagers. When they issue forth with cries of <i>Hop-pop</i> to observe this solemn rite, all who are of a different religious persuasion make haste to get out of their way; but men of the cannibal creed and of stout hearts will resolutely hold out their arms to be bitten. The sect of dog-eaters cut or tear dogs to pieces and devour some of the flesh; but they have to pay for the dogs which they consume in their religious enthusiasm.<a href="#note_93" id="noteref_93" name="noteref_93"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">93</span></span></a> In the performance of these savage rites the frenzied actors are believed to be inspired by a Cannibal Spirit and a Dog-eating Spirit respectively.<a href="#note_94" id="noteref_94" name="noteref_94"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">94</span></span></a> Again, in Morocco there is an order of saints known as Isowa or Aïsawa, followers of Mohammed ben Isa or Aïsa of Mequinez, whose tomb is at Fez. Every year on their founder's birthday they assemble at his shrine or elsewhere and holding each other's hands dance a frantic dance round a fire. <span class="tei tei-q">“While the mad dance is still proceeding, a sudden rush is made from the sanctuary, and the dancers, like men delirious, speed away to a place where live goats are tethered in readiness. At sight of these animals the fury of the savage and excited crowd reaches its height. In a few minutes the wretched animals are cut, or rather torn to pieces, and an orgy takes place over the raw and quivering flesh. When they seem satiated, the Emkaddim, who is generally on horseback, and carries a long stick, forms a sort of procession, preceded by wild music, if such discordant sounds will bear the name. Words can do no justice to the frightful scene which now ensues. The naked savages—for on these occasions a scanty piece of cotton is all their clothing—with their long black hair, ordinarily worn in plaits, tossed about by the rapid to-and-fro movements of the head, with faces and hands reeking with blood, and uttering loud cries resembling the bleating of goats, again enter the town. The place is now at their mercy, and the people avoid them as much as possible by shutting themselves up in their houses. A Christian or a Jew would run great risk of losing his life if either were found in the street. Goats are pushed out from the doors, and these the fanatics tear immediately to pieces with their hands, and then dispute over the morsels of bleeding flesh, as though they were ravenous wolves instead of men. Snakes also are thrown to them as tests of their divine frenzy, and these share the fate of the goats. Sometimes a luckless dog, straying as dogs will stray in a tumult, is seized on. Then the laymen, should any be at hand, will try to prevent the desecration of pious mouths. But the fanatics sometimes prevail, and the unclean animal, abhorred by the mussulman, is torn in pieces and devoured, or pretended to be devoured, with indiscriminating rage.”</span><a href="#note_95" id="noteref_95" name="noteref_95"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">95</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The custom of killing a god in animal form, which we shall examine more in detail further on, belongs to a very early stage of human culture, and is apt in later times to be misunderstood. The advance of thought tends to strip the old animal and plant gods of their bestial and vegetable husk, and to leave their human attributes (which are always the kernel of the conception) as the final and sole residuum. In other words, animal and plant gods tend to become purely anthropomorphic. When they have become wholly or nearly so, the animals and plants which were at first the deities themselves, still retain a vague and ill-understood connexion with the anthropomorphic gods who have been developed out of them. The origin of the relationship between the deity and the animal or plant having been forgotten, various stories are invented to explain it. These explanations may follow one of two lines according as they are based on the habitual or on the exceptional treatment of the sacred animal or plant. The sacred animal was habitually spared, and only exceptionally slain; and accordingly the myth might be devised to explain either why it was spared or why it was killed. Devised for the former purpose, the myth would tell of some service rendered to the deity by the animal; devised for the latter purpose, the myth would tell of some injury inflicted by the animal on the god. The reason given for sacrificing goats to Dionysus exemplifies a myth of the latter sort. They were sacrificed to him, it was said, because they injured the vine.<a href="#note_96" id="noteref_96" name="noteref_96"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">96</span></span></a> Now the goat, as we have seen, was originally an embodiment of the god himself. But when the god had divested himself of his animal character and had become essentially anthropomorphic, the killing of the goat in his worship came to be regarded no longer as a slaying of the deity himself, but as a sacrifice offered to him; and since some reason had to be assigned why the goat in particular should be sacrificed, it was alleged that this was a punishment inflicted on the goat for injuring the vine, the object of the god's especial care. Thus we have the strange spectacle of a god sacrificed to himself on the ground that he is his own enemy. And as the deity is supposed to partake of the victim offered to him, it follows that, when the victim is the god's old self, the god eats of his own flesh. Hence the goat-god Dionysus is represented as eating raw goat's blood;<a href="#note_97" id="noteref_97" name="noteref_97"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">97</span></span></a> and the bull-god Dionysus is called <span class="tei tei-q">“eater of bulls.”</span><a href="#note_98" id="noteref_98" name="noteref_98"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">98</span></span></a> On the analogy of these instances we may conjecture that wherever a deity is described as the eater of a particular animal, the animal in question was originally nothing but the deity himself.<a href="#note_99" id="noteref_99" name="noteref_99"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">99</span></span></a> Later on we shall find that some savages propitiate dead bears and whales by offering them portions of their own bodies.<a href="#note_100" id="noteref_100" name="noteref_100"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">100</span></span></a></p>
				<p>All this, however, does not explain why a deity of vegetation should appear in animal form. But the consideration of that point had better be deferred till we have discussed the character and attributes of Demeter. Meantime it remains to mention that in some places, instead of an animal, a human being was torn in pieces at the rites of Dionysus. This was the practice in Chios and Tenedos;<a href="#note_101" id="noteref_101" name="noteref_101"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">101</span></span></a> and at Potniae in Boeotia the tradition ran that it had been formerly the custom to sacrifice to the goat-smiting Dionysus a child, for whom a goat was afterwards substituted.<a href="#note_102" id="noteref_102" name="noteref_102"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">102</span></span></a> At Orchomenus, as we have seen, the human victim was taken from the women of an old royal family.<a href="#note_103" id="noteref_103" name="noteref_103"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">103</span></span></a> As the slain bull or goat represented the slain god, so, we may suppose, the human victim also represented him.</p>
				<p>The legends of the deaths of Pentheus and Lycurgus, two kings who are said to have been torn to pieces, the one by Bacchanals, the other by horses, for their opposition to the rites of Dionysus, may be, as I have already suggested,<a href="#note_104" id="noteref_104" name="noteref_104"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">104</span></span></a> distorted reminiscences of a custom of sacrificing divine kings in the character of Dionysus and of dispersing the fragments of their broken bodies over the fields for the purpose of fertilising them. In regard to Lycurgus, king of the Thracian tribe of the Edonians, it is expressly said that his subjects at the bidding of an oracle caused him to be rent in pieces by horses for the purpose of restoring the fertility of the ground after a period of barrenness and dearth.<a href="#note_105" id="noteref_105" name="noteref_105"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">105</span></span></a> There is no improbability in the tradition. We have seen that in Africa and other parts of the world kings or chiefs have often been put to death by their people for similar reasons.<a href="#note_106" id="noteref_106" name="noteref_106"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">106</span></span></a> Further, it is significant that King Lycurgus is said to have slain his own son Dryas with an axe in a fit of madness, mistaking him for a vine-branch.<a href="#note_107" id="noteref_107" name="noteref_107"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">107</span></span></a> Have we not in this tradition a reminiscence of a custom of sacrificing the king's son in place of the father? Similarly Athamas, a King of Thessaly or Boeotia, is said to have been doomed by an oracle to be sacrificed at the altar in order to remove the curse of barrenness which afflicted his country; however, he contrived to evade the sentence and in a fit of madness killed his own son Learchus, mistaking him for a wild beast. That this legend was not a mere myth is made probable by a custom observed at Alus down to historical times: the eldest male scion of the royal house was regularly sacrificed in due form to Laphystian Zeus if he ever set foot within the town-hall.<a href="#note_108" id="noteref_108" name="noteref_108"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">108</span></span></a> The close resemblance between the legends of King Athamas and King Lycurgus furnishes a ground for believing both legends to be based on a real custom of sacrificing either the king himself or one of his sons for the good of the country; and the story that the king's son Dryas perished because his frenzied father mistook him for a vine-branch fits in well with the theory that the victim in these sacrifices represented the vine-god Dionysus. It is probably no mere coincidence that Dionysus himself is said to have been torn in pieces at Thebes,<a href="#note_109" id="noteref_109" name="noteref_109"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">109</span></span></a> the very place where according to legend the same fate befell king Pentheus at the hands of the frenzied votaries of the vine-god.<a href="#note_110" id="noteref_110" name="noteref_110"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">110</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The theory that in prehistoric times Greek and Thracian kings or their sons may have been dismembered in the character of the vine-god or the corn-god for the purpose of fertilising the earth or quickening the vines has received of late years some confirmation from the discovery that down to the present time in Thrace, the original home of Dionysus, a drama is still annually performed which reproduces with remarkable fidelity some of the most striking traits in the Dionysiac myth and ritual.<a href="#note_111" id="noteref_111" name="noteref_111"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">111</span></span></a> In a former part of this work I have already called attention to this interesting survival of paganism among a Christian peasantry;<a href="#note_112" id="noteref_112" name="noteref_112"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">112</span></span></a> but it seems desirable and appropriate in this place to draw out somewhat more fully the parallelism between the modern drama and the ancient worship.</p>
				<p>The drama, which may reasonably be regarded as a direct descendant of the Dionysiac rites, is annually performed at the Carnival in all the Christian villages which cluster round Viza, the ancient Bizya, a town of Thrace situated about midway between Adrianople and Constantinople. In antiquity the city was the capital of the Thracian tribe of the Asti; the kings had their palace there,<a href="#note_113" id="noteref_113" name="noteref_113"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">113</span></span></a> probably in the acropolis, of which some fine walls are still standing. Inscriptions preserved in the modern town record the names of some of these old kings.<a href="#note_114" id="noteref_114" name="noteref_114"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">114</span></span></a> The date of the celebration is Cheese Monday, as it is locally called, which is the Monday of the last week of Carnival. At Viza itself the mummery has been shorn of some of its ancient features, but these have been kept up at the villages and have been particularly observed and recorded at the village of St. George (Haghios Gheorgios). It is to the drama as acted at that village that the following description specially applies. The principal parts in the drama are taken by two men disguised in goatskins. Each of them wears a headdress made of a complete goatskin, which is stuffed so as to rise a foot or more like a shako over his head, while the skin falls over the face, forming a mask with holes cut for the eyes and mouth. Their shoulders are thickly padded with hay to protect them from the blows which used to be rained very liberally on their backs. Fawnskins on their shoulders and goatskins on their legs are or used to be part of their equipment, and another indispensable part of it is a number of sheep-bells tied round their waists. One of the two skin-clad actors carries a bow and the other a wooden effigy of the male organ of generation. Both these actors must be married men. According to Mr. Vizyenos, they are chosen for periods of four years. Two unmarried boys dressed as girls and sometimes called brides also take part in the play; and a man disguised as an old woman in rags carries a mock baby in a basket; the brat is supposed to be a seven-months' child born out of wedlock and begotten by an unknown father. The basket in which the hopeful infant is paraded bears the ancient name of the winnowing-fan (<i>likni</i>, contracted from <i>liknon</i>) and the babe itself receives the very title <span class="tei tei-q">“He of the Winnowing-fan”</span> (<i>Liknites</i>) which in antiquity was applied to Dionysus. Two other actors, clad in rags with blackened faces and armed with stout saplings, play the parts of a gypsy-man and his wife; others personate policemen armed with swords and whips; and the troupe is completed by a man who discourses music on a bagpipe.</p>
				<p>Such are the masqueraders. The morning of the day on which they perform their little drama is spent by them going from door to door collecting bread, eggs, or money. At every door the two skin-clad maskers knock, the boys disguised as girls dance, and the gypsy man and wife enact an obscene pantomime on the straw-heap before the house. When every house in the village has been thus visited, the troop takes up position on the open space before the village church, where the whole population has already mustered to witness the performance. After a dance hand in hand, in which all the actors take part, the two skin-clad maskers withdraw and leave the field to the gypsies, who now pretend to forge a ploughshare, the man making believe to hammer the share and his wife to work the bellows. At this point the old woman's baby is supposed to grow up at a great pace, to develop a huge appetite for meat and drink, and to clamour for a wife. One of the skin-clad men now pursues one of the two pretended brides, and a mock marriage is celebrated between the couple. After these nuptials have been performed with a parody of a real wedding, the mock bridegroom is shot by his comrade with the bow and falls down on his face like dead. His slayer thereupon feigns to skin him with a knife; but the dead man's wife laments over her deceased husband with loud cries, throwing herself across his prostrate body. In this lamentation the slayer himself and all the other actors join in: a Christian funeral service is burlesqued; and the pretended corpse is lifted up as if to be carried to the grave. At this point, however, the dead man disconcerts the preparations for his burial by suddenly coming to life again and getting up. So ends the drama of death and resurrection.</p>
				<p>The next act opens with a repetition of the pretence of forging a ploughshare, but this time the gypsy man hammers on a real share. When the implement is supposed to have been fashioned, a real plough is brought forward, the mockery appears to cease, the two boys dressed as girls are yoked to the plough and drag it twice round the village square contrary to the way of the sun. One of the two skin-clad men walks at the tail of the plough, the other guides it in front, and a third man follows in the rear scattering seed from a basket. After the two rounds have been completed, the gypsy and his wife are yoked to the plough, and drag it a third time round the square, the two skin-clad men still playing the part of ploughmen. At Viza the plough is drawn by the skin-clad men themselves. While the plough is going its rounds, followed by the sower sowing the seed, the people pray aloud, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“May wheat be ten piastres the bushel! Rye five piastres the bushel! Amen, O God, that the poor may eat! Yea, O God, that poor folk be filled!”</span> This ends the performance. The evening is spent in feasting on the proceeds of the house-to-house visitation which took place in the morning.<a href="#note_115" id="noteref_115" name="noteref_115"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">115</span></span></a></p>
				<p>A kindred festival is observed on the same day of the Carnival at Kosti, a place in the extreme north of Thrace, near the Black Sea. There a man dressed in sheepskins or goatskins, with a mask on his face, bells round his neck, and a broom in his hand, goes round the village collecting food and presents. He is addressed as a king and escorted with music. With him go boys dressed as girls, and another boy, not so disguised, who carries wine in a wooden bottle and gives of it to every householder to drink in a cup, receiving a gift in return. The king then mounts a two-wheeled cart and is drawn to the church. He carries seed in his hand, and at the church two bands of men, one of married men and the other of unmarried men, try each in turn to induce the king to throw the seed on them. Finally he casts it on the ground in front of the church. The ceremony ends with stripping the king of his clothes and flinging him into the river, after which he resumes his usual dress.<a href="#note_116" id="noteref_116" name="noteref_116"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">116</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In these ceremonies, still annually held at and near an old capital of Thracian kings, the points of similarity to the ritual of the ancient Thracian deity Dionysus are sufficiently obvious.<a href="#note_117" id="noteref_117" name="noteref_117"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">117</span></span></a> The goatskins in which the principal actors are disguised remind us of the identification of Dionysus with a goat: the infant, cradled in a winnowing-fan and taking its name from the implement, answers exactly to the traditions and the monuments which represent the infant Dionysus as similarly cradled and similarly named: the pretence that the baby is a seven-months' child born out of wedlock and begotten by an unknown father tallies precisely with the legend that Dionysus was born prematurely in the seventh month as the offspring of an intrigue between a mortal woman and a mysterious divine father:<a href="#note_118" id="noteref_118" name="noteref_118"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">118</span></span></a> the same coarse symbol of reproductive energy which characterised the ancient ritual of Dionysus figures conspicuously in the modern drama: the annual mock marriage of the goatskin-clad mummer with the pretended bride may be compared with the annual pretence of marrying Dionysus to the Queen of Athens: and the simulated slaughter and resurrection of the same goatskin-clad actor may be compared with the traditional slaughter and resurrection of the god himself. Further, the ceremony of ploughing, in which after his resurrection the goatskin-clad mummer takes a prominent part, fits in well not only with the legend that Dionysus was the first to yoke oxen to the plough, but also with the symbolism of the winnowing-fan in his worship; while the prayers for plentiful crops which accompany the ploughing accord with the omens of an abundant harvest which were drawn of old from the mystic light seen to illumine by night one of his ancient sanctuaries in Thrace. Lastly, in the ceremony as observed at Kosti the giving of wine by the king's attendant is an act worthy of the wine-god: the throwing of seed by the king can only be interpreted, like the ploughing, as a charm to promote the fertility of the ground; and the royal title borne by the principal masker harmonises well with the theory that the part of the god of the corn and the wine was of old sustained by the Thracian kings who reigned at Bisya.</p>
				<p>If we ask, To what ancient festival of Dionysus does the modern celebration of the Carnival in Thrace most nearly correspond? the answer can be hardly doubtful. The Thracian drama of the mock marriage of the goatskin-clad mummer, his mimic death and resurrection, and his subsequent ploughing, corresponds both in date and in character most nearly to the Athenian festival of the Anthesteria, which was celebrated at Athens during three days in early spring, towards the end of February or the beginning of March. Thus the date of the Anthesteria could not fall far from, and it might sometimes actually coincide with, the last week of the Carnival, the date of the Thracian celebration. While the details of the festival of the Anthesteria are obscure, its general character is well known. It was a festival both of wine-drinking and of the dead, whose souls were supposed to revisit the city and to go about the streets, just as in modern Europe and in many other parts of the world the ghosts of the departed are still believed to return to their old homes on one day of the year and to be entertained by their relatives at a solemn Feast of All Souls.<a href="#note_119" id="noteref_119" name="noteref_119"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">119</span></span></a> But the Dionysiac nature of the festival was revealed not merely by the opening of the wine-vats and the wassailing which went on throughout the city among freemen and slaves alike; on the second day of the festival the marriage of Dionysus with the Queen of Athens was celebrated with great solemnity at the Bucolium or Ox-stall.<a href="#note_120" id="noteref_120" name="noteref_120"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">120</span></span></a> It has been suggested with much probability<a href="#note_121" id="noteref_121" name="noteref_121"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">121</span></span></a> that at this sacred marriage in the Ox-stall the god was represented wholly or partly in bovine shape, whether by an image or by an actor dressed in the hide and wearing the horns of a bull; for, as we have seen, Dionysus was often supposed to assume the form of a bull and to present himself in that guise to his worshippers. If this conjecture should prove to be correct—though a demonstration of it can hardly be expected—the sacred marriage of the Queen to the Bull-god at Athens would be parallel to the sacred marriage of the Queen to the Bull-god at Cnossus, according to the interpretation which I have suggested of the myth of Pasiphae and the Minotaur;<a href="#note_122" id="noteref_122" name="noteref_122"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">122</span></span></a> only whereas the bull-god at Cnossus, if I am right, stood for the Sun, the bull-god at Athens stood for the powers of vegetation, especially the corn and the vines. It would not be surprising that among a cattle-breeding people in early days the bull, regarded as a type of strength and reproductive energy, should be employed to symbolise and represent more than one of the great powers of nature. If Dionysus did indeed figure as a bull at his marriage, it is not improbable that on that occasion his representative, whether a real bull or a man dressed in a bull's hide, took part in a ceremony of ploughing; for we have seen that the invention of yoking oxen to the plough was ascribed to Dionysus, and we know that the Athenians performed a sacred ceremony of ploughing, which went by the name of the Ox-yoked Ploughing and took place in a field or other open piece of ground at the foot of the Acropolis.<a href="#note_123" id="noteref_123" name="noteref_123"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">123</span></span></a> It is a reasonable conjecture that the field of the Ox-yoked Ploughing may have adjoined the building called the Ox-stall in which the marriage of Dionysus with the Queen was solemnised;<a href="#note_124" id="noteref_124" name="noteref_124"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">124</span></span></a> for that building is known to have been near the Prytaneum or Town-Hall on the northern slope of the Acropolis.<a href="#note_125" id="noteref_125" name="noteref_125"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">125</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Thus on the whole the ancient festival of the Anthesteria, so far as its features are preserved by tradition or can be restored by the use of reasonable conjecture, presents several important analogies to the modern Thracian Carnival in respect of wine-drinking, a mock marriage of disguised actors, and a ceremony of ploughing. The resemblance between the ancient and the modern ritual would be still closer if some eminent modern scholars, who wrote before the discovery of the Thracian Carnival, and whose judgment was therefore not biassed by its analogy to the Athenian festival, are right in holding that another important feature of the Anthesteria was the dramatic death and resurrection of Dionysus.<a href="#note_126" id="noteref_126" name="noteref_126"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">126</span></span></a> They point out that at the marriage of Dionysus fourteen Sacred Women officiated at fourteen altars;<a href="#note_127" id="noteref_127" name="noteref_127"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">127</span></span></a> that the number of the Titans, who tore Dionysus in pieces, was fourteen, namely seven male and seven female;<a href="#note_128" id="noteref_128" name="noteref_128"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">128</span></span></a> and that Osiris, a god who in some respects corresponded closely to Dionysus, is said to have been rent by Typhon into fourteen fragments.<a href="#note_129" id="noteref_129" name="noteref_129"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">129</span></span></a> Hence they conjecture that at Athens the body of Dionysus was dramatically broken into fourteen fragments, one for each of the fourteen altars, and that it was afterwards dramatically pieced together and restored to life by the fourteen Sacred Women, just as the broken body of Osiris was pieced together by a company of gods and goddesses and restored to life by his sister Isis.<a href="#note_130" id="noteref_130" name="noteref_130"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">130</span></span></a> The conjecture is ingenious and plausible, but with our existing sources of information it must remain a conjecture and nothing more. Could it be established, it would forge another strong link in the chain of evidence which binds the modern Thracian Carnival to the ancient Athenian Anthesteria; for in that case the drama of the divine death and resurrection would have to be added to the other features which these two festivals of spring possess in common, and we should have to confess that Greece had what we may call its Good Friday and its Easter Sunday long before the events took place in Judaea which diffused these two annual commemorations of the Dying and Reviving God over a great part of the civilised world. From so simple a beginning may flow consequences so far-reaching and impressive; for in the light of the rude Thracian ceremony we may surmise that the high tragedy of the death and resurrection of Dionysus originated in a rustic mummers' play acted by ploughmen for the purpose of fertilising the brown earth which they turned up with the gleaming share in sunshiny days of spring, as they followed the slow-paced oxen down the long furrows in the fallow field. Later on we shall see that a play of the same sort is still acted, or was acted down to recent years, by English yokels on Plough Monday.</p>
				<p>But before we pass from the tragic myth and ritual of Dionysus to the sweeter story and milder worship of Demeter and Persephone, the true Greek deities of the corn, it is fair to admit that the legends of human sacrifice, which have left so dark a stain on the memory of the old Thracian god, may have been nothing more than mere misinterpretations of a sacrificial ritual in which an animal victim was treated as a human being. For example, at Tenedos the new-born calf sacrificed to Dionysus was shod in buskins, and the mother cow was tended like a woman in child-bed.<a href="#note_131" id="noteref_131" name="noteref_131"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">131</span></span></a> At Rome a she-goat was sacrificed to Vedijovis as if it were a human victim.<a href="#note_132" id="noteref_132" name="noteref_132"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">132</span></span></a> Yet on the other hand it is equally possible, and perhaps more probable, that these curious rites were themselves mitigations of an older and ruder custom of sacrificing human beings, and that the later pretence of treating the sacrificial victims as if they were human beings was merely part of a pious and merciful fraud, which palmed off on the deity less precious victims than living men and women. This interpretation is supported by the undoubted cases in which animals have been substituted for human victims.<a href="#note_133" id="noteref_133" name="noteref_133"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">133</span></span></a> On the whole we may conclude that neither the polished manners of a later age, nor the glamour which Greek poetry and art threw over the figure of Dionysus, sufficed to conceal or erase the deep lines of savagery and cruelty imprinted on the features of this barbarous deity.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
