<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc5" name="toc5"/>
				<a id="pdf6" name="pdf6"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter II. Demeter And Persephone.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>Dionysus was not the only Greek deity whose tragic story and ritual appear to reflect the decay and revival of vegetation. In another form and with a different application the old tale reappears in the myth of Demeter and Persephone. Substantially their myth is identical with the Syrian one of Aphrodite (Astarte) and Adonis, the Phrygian one of Cybele and Attis, and the Egyptian one of Isis and Osiris. In the Greek fable, as in its Asiatic and Egyptian counterparts, a goddess mourns the loss of a loved one, who personifies the vegetation, more especially the corn, which dies in winter to revive in spring; only whereas the Oriental imagination figured the loved and lost one as a dead lover or a dead husband lamented by his leman or his wife, Greek fancy embodied the same idea in the tenderer and purer form of a dead daughter bewailed by her sorrowing mother.</p>
				<p>The oldest literary document which narrates the myth of Demeter and Persephone is the beautiful Homeric <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hymn to Demeter</span></span>, which critics assign to the seventh century before our era.<a href="#note_134" id="noteref_134" name="noteref_134"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">134</span></span></a> The object of the poem is to explain the origin of the Eleusinian mysteries, and the complete silence of the poet as to Athens and the Athenians, who in after ages took a conspicuous part in the festival, renders it probable that the hymn was composed in the far off time when Eleusis was still a petty independent state, and before the stately procession of the Mysteries had begun to defile, in bright September days, over the low chain of barren rocky hills which divides the flat Eleusinian cornland from the more spacious olive-clad expanse of the Athenian plain. Be that as it may, the hymn reveals to us the conception which the writer entertained of the character and functions of the two goddesses: their natural shapes stand out sharply enough under the thin veil of poetical imagery. The youthful Persephone, so runs the tale, was gathering roses and lilies, crocuses and violets, hyacinths and narcissuses in a lush meadow, when the earth gaped and Pluto, lord of the Dead, issuing from the abyss carried her off on his golden car to be his bride and queen in the gloomy subterranean world. Her sorrowing mother Demeter, with her yellow tresses veiled in a dark mourning mantle, sought her over land and sea, and learning from the Sun her daughter's fate she withdrew in high dudgeon from the gods and took up her abode at Eleusis, where she presented herself to the king's daughters in the guise of an old woman, sitting sadly under the shadow of an olive tree beside the Maiden's Well, to which the damsels had come to draw water in bronze pitchers for their father's house. In her wrath at her bereavement the goddess suffered not the seed to grow in the earth but kept it hidden under ground, and she vowed that never would she set foot on Olympus and never would she let the corn sprout till her lost daughter should be restored to her. Vainly the oxen dragged the ploughs to and fro in the fields; vainly the sower dropped the barley seed in the brown furrows; nothing came up from the parched and crumbling soil. Even the Rarian plain near Eleusis, which was wont to wave with yellow harvests, lay bare and fallow.<a href="#note_135" id="noteref_135" name="noteref_135"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">135</span></span></a> Mankind would have perished of hunger and the gods would have been robbed of the sacrifices which were their due, if Zeus in alarm had not commanded Pluto to disgorge his prey, to restore his bride Persephone to her mother Demeter. The grim lord of the Dead smiled and obeyed, but before he sent back his queen to the upper air on a golden car, he gave her the seed of a pomegranate to eat, which ensured that she would return to him. But Zeus stipulated that henceforth Persephone should spend two thirds of every year with her mother and the gods in the upper world and one third of the year with her husband in the nether world, from which she was to return year by year when the earth was gay with spring flowers. Gladly the daughter then returned to the sunshine, gladly her mother received her and fell upon her neck; and in her joy at recovering the lost one Demeter made the corn to sprout from the clods of the ploughed fields and all the broad earth to be heavy with leaves and blossoms. And straightway she went and shewed this happy sight to the princes of Eleusis, to Triptolemus, Eumolpus, Diocles, and to the king Celeus himself, and moreover she revealed to them her sacred rites and mysteries. Blessed, says the poet, is the mortal man who has seen these things, but he who has had no share of them in life will never be happy in death when he has descended into the darkness of the grave. So the two goddesses departed to dwell in bliss with the gods on Olympus; and the bard ends the hymn with a pious prayer to Demeter and Persephone that they would be pleased to grant him a livelihood in return for his song.<a href="#note_136" id="noteref_136" name="noteref_136"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">136</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It has been generally recognised, and indeed it seems scarcely open to doubt, that the main theme which the poet set before himself in composing this hymn was to describe the traditional foundation of the Eleusinian mysteries by the goddess Demeter. The whole poem leads up to the transformation scene in which the bare leafless expanse of the Eleusinian plain is suddenly turned, at the will of the goddess, into a vast sheet of ruddy corn; the beneficent deity takes the princes of Eleusis, shews them what she has done, teaches them her mystic rites, and vanishes with her daughter to heaven. The revelation of the mysteries is the triumphal close of the piece. This conclusion is confirmed by a more minute examination of the poem, which proves that the poet has given, not merely a general account of the foundation of the mysteries, but also in more or less veiled language mythical explanations of the origin of particular rites which we have good reason to believe formed essential features of the festival. Amongst the rites as to which the poet thus drops significant hints are the preliminary fast of the candidates for initiation, the torchlight procession, the all-night vigil, the sitting of the candidates, veiled and in silence, on stools covered with sheepskins, the use of scurrilous language, the breaking of ribald jests, and the solemn communion with the divinity by participation in a draught of barley-water from a holy chalice.<a href="#note_137" id="noteref_137" name="noteref_137"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">137</span></span></a></p>
				<p>But there is yet another and a deeper secret of the mysteries which the author of the poem appears to have divulged under cover of his narrative. He tells us how, as soon as she had transformed the barren brown expanse of the Eleusinian plain into a field of golden grain, she gladdened the eyes of Triptolemus and the other Eleusinian princes by shewing them the growing or standing corn. When we compare this part of the story with the statement of a Christian writer of the second century, Hippolytus, that the very heart of the mysteries consisted in shewing to the initiated a reaped ear of corn,<a href="#note_138" id="noteref_138" name="noteref_138"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">138</span></span></a> we can hardly doubt that the poet of the hymn was well acquainted with this solemn rite, and that he deliberately intended to explain its origin in precisely the same way as he explained other rites of the mysteries, namely by representing Demeter as having set the example of performing the ceremony in her own person. Thus myth and ritual mutually explain and confirm each other. The poet of the seventh century before our era gives us the myth—he could not without sacrilege have revealed the ritual: the Christian father reveals the ritual, and his revelation accords perfectly with the veiled hint of the old poet. On the whole, then, we may, with many modern scholars, confidently accept the statement of the learned Christian father Clement of Alexandria, that the myth of Demeter and Persephone was acted as a sacred drama in the mysteries of Eleusis.<a href="#note_139" id="noteref_139" name="noteref_139"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">139</span></span></a></p>
				<p>But if the myth was acted as a part, perhaps as the principal part, of the most famous and solemn religious rites of ancient Greece, we have still to enquire, What was, after all, stripped of later accretions, the original kernel of the myth which appears to later ages surrounded and transfigured by an aureole of awe and mystery, lit up by some of the most brilliant rays of Grecian literature and art? If we follow the indications given by our oldest literary authority on the subject, the author of the Homeric hymn to Demeter, the riddle is not hard to read; the figures of the two goddesses, the mother and the daughter, resolve themselves into personifications of the corn.<a href="#note_140" id="noteref_140" name="noteref_140"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">140</span></span></a> At least this appears to be fairly certain for the daughter Persephone. The goddess who spends three or, according to another version of the myth, six months of every year with the dead under ground and the remainder of the year with the living above ground;<a href="#note_141" id="noteref_141" name="noteref_141"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">141</span></span></a> in whose absence the barley seed is hidden in the earth and the fields lie bare and fallow; on whose return in spring to the upper world the corn shoots up from the clods and the earth is heavy with leaves and blossoms—this goddess can surely be nothing else than a mythical embodiment of the vegetation, and particularly of the corn, which is buried under the soil for some months of every winter and comes to life again, as from the grave, in the sprouting cornstalks and the opening flowers and foliage of every spring. No other reasonable and probable explanation of Persephone seems possible.<a href="#note_142" id="noteref_142" name="noteref_142"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">142</span></span></a> And if the daughter goddess was a personification of the young corn of the present year, may not the mother goddess be a personification of the old corn of last year, which has given birth to the new crops? The only alternative to this view of Demeter would seem to be to suppose that she is a personification of the earth, from whose broad bosom the corn and all other plants spring up, and of which accordingly they may appropriately enough be regarded as the daughters. This view of the original nature of Demeter has indeed been taken by some writers, both ancient and modern,<a href="#note_143" id="noteref_143" name="noteref_143"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">143</span></span></a> and it is one which can be reasonably maintained. But it appears to have been rejected by the author of the Homeric hymn to Demeter, for he not only distinguishes Demeter from the personified Earth but places the two in the sharpest opposition to each other. He tells us that it was Earth who, in accordance with the will of Zeus and to please Pluto, lured Persephone to her doom by causing the narcissuses to grow which tempted the young goddess to stray far beyond the reach of help in the lush meadow.<a href="#note_144" id="noteref_144" name="noteref_144"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">144</span></span></a> Thus Demeter of the hymn, far from being identical with the Earth-goddess, must have regarded that divinity as her worst enemy, since it was to her insidious wiles that she owed the loss of her daughter. But if the Demeter of the hymn cannot have been a personification of the earth, the only alternative apparently is to conclude that she was a personification of the corn.</p>
				<p>With this conclusion all the indications of the hymn-writer seem to harmonise. He certainly represents Demeter as the goddess by whose power and at whose pleasure the corn either grows or remains hidden in the ground; and to what deity can such powers be so fittingly ascribed as to the goddess of the corn? He calls Demeter yellow and tells how her yellow tresses flowed down on her shoulders;<a href="#note_145" id="noteref_145" name="noteref_145"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">145</span></span></a> could any colour be more appropriate with which to paint the divinity of the yellow grain? The same identification of Demeter with the ripe, the yellow corn is made even more clearly by a still older poet, Homer himself, or at all events the author of the fifth book of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>. There we read: <span class="tei tei-q">“And even as the wind carries the chaff about the sacred threshing-floors, when men are winnowing, what time yellow Demeter sifts the corn from the chaff on the hurrying blast, so that the heaps of chaff grow white below, so were the Achaeans whitened above by the cloud of dust which the hoofs of the horses spurned to the brazen heaven.”</span><a href="#note_146" id="noteref_146" name="noteref_146"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">146</span></span></a> Here the yellow Demeter who sifts the grain from the chaff at the threshing-floor can hardly be any other than the goddess of the yellow corn; she cannot be the Earth-goddess, for what has the Earth-goddess to do with the grain and the chaff blown about a threshing-floor? With this interpretation it agrees that elsewhere Homer speaks of men eating <span class="tei tei-q">“Demeter's corn”</span>;<a href="#note_147" id="noteref_147" name="noteref_147"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">147</span></span></a> and still more definitely Hesiod speaks of <span class="tei tei-q">“the annual store of food, which the earth bears, Demeter's corn,”</span><a href="#note_148" id="noteref_148" name="noteref_148"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">148</span></span></a> thus distinguishing the goddess of the corn from the earth which bears it. Still more clearly does a later Greek poet personify the corn as Demeter when, in allusion to the time of the corn-reaping, he says that then <span class="tei tei-q">“the sturdy swains cleave Demeter limb from limb.”</span><a href="#note_149" id="noteref_149" name="noteref_149"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">149</span></span></a> And just as the ripe or yellow corn was personified as the Yellow Demeter, so the unripe or green corn was personified as the Green Demeter. In that character the goddess had sanctuaries at Athens and other places; sacrifices were appropriately offered to Green Demeter in spring when the earth was growing green with the fresh vegetation, and the victims included sows big with young,<a href="#note_150" id="noteref_150" name="noteref_150"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">150</span></span></a> which no doubt were intended not merely to symbolise but magically to promote the abundance of the crops.</p>
				<p>In Greek the various kinds of corn were called by the general name of <span class="tei tei-q">“Demeter's fruits,”</span><a href="#note_151" id="noteref_151" name="noteref_151"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">151</span></span></a> just as in Latin they were called the <span class="tei tei-q">“fruits or gifts of Ceres,”</span><a href="#note_152" id="noteref_152" name="noteref_152"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">152</span></span></a> an expression which survives in the English word cereals. Tradition ran that before Demeter's time men neither cultivated corn nor tilled the ground, but roamed the mountains and woods in search of the wild fruits which the earth produced spontaneously from her womb for their subsistence. The tradition clearly implies not only that Demeter was the goddess of the corn, but that she was different from and younger than the goddess of the Earth, since it is expressly affirmed that before Demeter's time the earth existed and supplied mankind with nourishment in the shape of wild herbs, grasses, flowers and fruits.<a href="#note_153" id="noteref_153" name="noteref_153"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">153</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In ancient art Demeter and Persephone are characterised as goddesses of the corn by the crowns of corn which they wear on their heads and by the stalks of corn which they hold in their hands.<a href="#note_154" id="noteref_154" name="noteref_154"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">154</span></span></a> Theocritus describes a smiling image of Demeter standing by a heap of yellow grain on a threshing-floor and grasping sheaves of barley and poppies in both her hands.<a href="#note_155" id="noteref_155" name="noteref_155"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">155</span></span></a> Indeed corn and poppies singly or together were a frequent symbol of the goddess, as we learn not only from the testimony of ancient writers<a href="#note_156" id="noteref_156" name="noteref_156"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">156</span></span></a> but from many existing monuments of classical art.<a href="#note_157" id="noteref_157" name="noteref_157"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">157</span></span></a> The naturalness of the symbol can be doubted by no one who has seen—and who has not seen?—a field of yellow corn bespangled thick with scarlet poppies; and we need not resort to the shifts of an ancient mythologist, who explained the symbolism of the poppy in Demeter's hand by comparing the globular shape of the poppy to the roundness of our globe, the unevenness of its edges to hills and valleys, and the hollow interior of the scarlet flower to the caves and dens of the earth.<a href="#note_158" id="noteref_158" name="noteref_158"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">158</span></span></a> If only students would study the little black and white books of men less and the great rainbow-tinted book of nature more; if they would more frequently exchange the heavy air and the dim light of libraries for the freshness and the sunshine of the open sky; if they would oftener unbend their minds by rural walks between fields of waving corn, beside rivers rippling by under grey willows, or down green lanes, where the hedges are white with the hawthorn bloom or red with wild roses, they might sometimes learn more about primitive religion than can be gathered from many dusty volumes, in which wire-drawn theories are set forth with all the tedious parade of learning.</p>
				<p>Nowhere, perhaps, in the monuments of Greek art is the character of Persephone as a personification of the young corn sprouting in spring portrayed more gracefully and more truly than on a coin of Lampsacus of the fourth century before our era. On it we see the goddess in the very act of rising from the earth. <span class="tei tei-q">“Her face is upraised; in her hand are three ears of corn, and others together with grapes are springing behind her shoulder. Complete is here the identification of the goddess and her attribute: she is embowered amid the ears of growing corn, and like it half buried in the ground. She does not make the corn and vine grow, but she <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">is</span></em> the corn and vine growing, and returning again to the face of the earth after lying hidden in its depths. Certainly the artist who designed this beautiful figure thoroughly understood Hellenic religion.”</span><a href="#note_159" id="noteref_159" name="noteref_159"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">159</span></span></a></p>
				<p>As the goddess who first bestowed corn on mankind and taught them to sow and cultivate it,<a href="#note_160" id="noteref_160" name="noteref_160"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">160</span></span></a> Demeter was naturally invoked and propitiated by farmers before they undertook the various operations of the agricultural year. In autumn, when he heard the sonorous trumpeting of the cranes, as they winged their way southward in vast flocks high overhead, the Greek husbandman knew that the rains were near and that the time of ploughing was at hand; but before he put his hand to the plough he prayed to Underground Zeus and to Holy Demeter for a heavy crop of Demeter's sacred corn. Then he guided the ox-drawn plough down the field, turning up the brown earth with the share, while a swain followed close behind with a hoe, who covered up the seed as fast as it fell to protect it from the voracious birds that fluttered and twittered at the plough-tail.<a href="#note_161" id="noteref_161" name="noteref_161"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">161</span></span></a> But while the ordinary Greek farmer took the signal for ploughing from the clangour of the cranes, Hesiod and other writers who aimed at greater exactness laid it down as a rule that the ploughing should begin with the autumnal setting of the Pleiades in the morning, which in Hesiod's time fell on the twenty-sixth of October.<a href="#note_162" id="noteref_162" name="noteref_162"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">162</span></span></a> The month in which the Pleiades set in the morning was generally recognised by the Greeks as the month of sowing; it corresponded apparently in part to our October, in part to our November. The Athenians called it Pyanepsion; the Boeotians named it significantly Damatrius, that is, Demeter's month, and they celebrated a feast of mourning because, says Plutarch, who as a Boeotian speaks with authority on such a matter, Demeter was then in mourning for the descent of Persephone.<a href="#note_163" id="noteref_163" name="noteref_163"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">163</span></span></a> Is it possible to express more clearly the true original nature of Persephone as the corn-seed which has just been buried in the earth? The obvious, the almost inevitable conclusion did not escape Plutarch. He tells us that the mournful rites which were held at the time of the autumn sowing nominally commemorated the actions of deities, but that the real sadness was for the fruits of the earth, some of which at that season dropped of themselves and vanished from the trees, while others in the shape of seed were committed with anxious thoughts to the ground by men, who scraped the earth and then huddled it up over the seed, just as if they were burying and mourning for the dead.<a href="#note_164" id="noteref_164" name="noteref_164"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">164</span></span></a> Surely this interpretation of the custom and of the myth of Persephone is not only beautiful but true.</p>
				<p>And just as the Greek husbandman prayed to the Corn Goddess when he committed the seed, with anxious forebodings, to the furrows, so after he had reaped the harvest and brought back the yellow sheaves with rejoicing to the threshing-floor, he paid the bountiful goddess her dues in the form of a thank-offering of golden grain. Theocritus has painted for us in glowing colours a picture of a rustic harvest-home, as it fell on a bright autumn day some two thousand years ago in the little Greek island of Cos.<a href="#note_165" id="noteref_165" name="noteref_165"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">165</span></span></a> The poet tells us how he went with two friends from the city to attend a festival given by farmers, who were offering first-fruits to Demeter from the store of barley with which she had filled their barns. The day was warm, indeed so hot that the very lizards, which love to bask and run about in the sun, were slumbering in the crevices of the stone-walls, and not a lark soared carolling into the blue vault of heaven. Yet despite the great heat there were everywhere signs of autumn. <span class="tei tei-q">“All things,”</span> says the poet, <span class="tei tei-q">“smelt of summer, but smelt of autumn too.”</span> Indeed the day was really autumnal; for a goat-herd who met the friends on their way to the rural merry-making, asked them whether they were bound for the treading of the grapes in the wine-presses. And when they had reached their destination and reclined at ease in the dappled shade of over-arching poplars and elms, with the babble of a neighbouring fountain, the buzz of the cicadas, the hum of bees, and the cooing of doves in their ears, the ripe apples and pears rolled in the grass at their feet and the branches of the wild-plum trees were bowed down to the earth with the weight of their purple fruit. So couched on soft beds of fragrant lentisk they passed the sultry hours singing ditties alternately, while a rustic image of Demeter, to whom the honours of the day were paid, stood smiling beside a heap of yellow grain on the threshing-floor, with corn-stalks and poppies in her hands.</p>
				<p>In this description the time of year when the harvest-home was celebrated is clearly marked. Apart from the mention of the ripe apples, pears, and plums, the reference to the treading of the grapes is decisive. The Greeks gather and press the grapes in the first half of October,<a href="#note_166" id="noteref_166" name="noteref_166"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">166</span></span></a> and accordingly it is to this date that the harvest-festival described by Theocritus must be assigned. At the present day in Greece the maize-harvest immediately precedes the vintage, the grain being reaped and garnered at the end of September. Travelling in rural districts of Argolis and Arcadia at that time of the year you pass from time to time piles of the orange-coloured cobs laid up ready to be shelled, or again heaps of the yellow grain beside the pods. But maize was unknown to the ancient Greeks, who, like their modern descendants, reaped their wheat and barley crops much earlier in the summer, usually from the end of April till June.<a href="#note_167" id="noteref_167" name="noteref_167"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">167</span></span></a> However, we may conclude that the day immortalised by Theocritus was one of those autumn days of great heat and effulgent beauty which in Greece may occur at any time up to the very verge of winter. I remember such a day at Panopeus on the borders of Phocis and Boeotia. It was the first of November, yet the sun shone in cloudless splendour and the heat was so great, that when I had examined the magnificent remains of ancient Greek fortification-walls which crown the summit of the hill, it was delicious to repose on a grassy slope in the shade of some fine holly-oaks and to inhale the sweet scent of the wild thyme, which perfumed all the air. But it was summer's farewell. Next morning the weather had completely changed. A grey November sky lowered sadly overhead, and grey mists hung like winding-sheets on the lower slopes of the barren mountains which shut in the fatal plain of Chaeronea.</p>
				<p>Thus we may infer that in the rural districts of ancient Greece farmers offered their first-fruits of the barley harvest to Demeter in autumn about the time when the grapes were being trodden in the wine-presses and the ripe apples and pears littered the ground in the orchards. At first sight the lateness of the festival in the year is surprising; for in the lowlands of Greece at the present day barley is reaped at the end of April and wheat in May,<a href="#note_168" id="noteref_168" name="noteref_168"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">168</span></span></a> and in antiquity the time of harvest would seem not to have been very different, for Hesiod bids the husbandman put the sickle to the corn at the morning rising of the Pleiades,<a href="#note_169" id="noteref_169" name="noteref_169"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">169</span></span></a> which in his time took place on the eleventh of May.<a href="#note_170" id="noteref_170" name="noteref_170"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">170</span></span></a> But if the harvest was reaped in spring or early summer, why defer the offerings of corn to the Corn Goddess until the middle of autumn? The reason for the delay is not, so far as I am aware, explained by any ancient author, and accordingly it must remain for us a matter of conjecture. I surmise that the reason may have been a calculation on the part of the practical farmer that the best time to propitiate the Corn Goddess was not after harvest, when he had got all that was to be got out of her, but immediately before ploughing and sowing, when he had everything to hope from her good-will and everything to fear from her displeasure. When he had reaped his corn, and the sheaves had been safely garnered in his barns, he might, so to say, snap his fingers at the Corn Goddess. What could she do for him on the bare stubble-field which lay scorched and baking under the fierce rays of the sun all the long rainless summer through? But matters wore a very different aspect when, with the shortening and cooling of the days, he began to scan the sky for clouds<a href="#note_171" id="noteref_171" name="noteref_171"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">171</span></span></a> and to listen for the cries of the cranes as they flew southward, heralding by their trumpet-like notes the approach of the autumnal rains. Then he knew that the time had come to break up the ground that it might receive the seed and be fertilised by the refreshing water of heaven; then he bethought him of the Corn Goddess once more and brought forth from the grange a share of the harvested corn with which to woo her favour and induce her to quicken the grain which he was about to commit to the earth. On this theory the Greek offering of first-fruits was prompted not so much by gratitude for past favours as by a shrewd eye to favours to come, and perhaps this interpretation of the custom does no serious injustice to the cool phlegmatic temper of the bucolic mind, which is more apt to be moved by considerations of profit than by sentiment. At all events the reasons suggested for delaying the harvest-festival accord perfectly with the natural conditions and seasons of farming in Greece. For in that country the summer is practically rainless, and during the long months of heat and drought the cultivation of the two ancient cereals, barley and wheat, is at a standstill. The first rains of autumn fall about the middle of October,<a href="#note_172" id="noteref_172" name="noteref_172"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">172</span></span></a> and that was the Greek farmer's great time for ploughing and sowing.<a href="#note_173" id="noteref_173" name="noteref_173"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">173</span></span></a> Hence we should expect him to make his offering of first-fruits to the Corn Goddess shortly before he ploughed and sowed, and this expectation is entirely confirmed by the date which we have inferred for the offering from the evidence of Theocritus. Thus the sacrifice of barley to Demeter in the autumn would seem to have been not so much a thank-offering as a bribe judiciously administered to her at the very moment of all the year when her services were most urgently wanted.</p>
				<p>When with the progress of civilisation a number of petty agricultural communities have merged into a single state dependent for its subsistence mainly on the cultivation of the ground, it commonly happens that, though every farmer continues to perform for himself the simple old rites designed to ensure the blessing of the gods on his crops, the government undertakes to celebrate similar, though more stately and elaborate, rites on behalf of the whole people, lest the neglect of public worship should draw down on the country the wrath of the offended deities. Hence it comes about that, for all their pomp and splendour, the national festivals of such states are often merely magnified and embellished copies of homely rites and uncouth observances carried out by rustics in the open fields, in barns, and on threshing-floors. In ancient Egypt the religion of Isis and Osiris furnishes examples of solemnities which have been thus raised from the humble rank of rural festivities to the dignity of national celebrations;<a href="#note_174" id="noteref_174" name="noteref_174"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">174</span></span></a> and in ancient Greece a like development may be traced in the religion of Demeter. If the Greek ploughman prayed to Demeter and Underground Zeus for a good crop before he put his hand to the plough in autumn, the authorities of the Athenian state celebrated about the same time and for the same purpose a public festival in honour of Demeter at Eleusis. It was called the Proerosia, which signifies <span class="tei tei-q">“Before the Ploughing”</span>; and as the festival was dedicated to her, Demeter herself bore the name of Proerosia. Tradition ran that once on a time the whole world was desolated by a famine, and that to remedy the evil the Pythian oracle bade the Athenians offer the sacrifice of the Proerosia on behalf of all men. They did so, and the famine ceased accordingly. Hence to testify their gratitude for the deliverance people sent the first-fruits of their harvest from all quarters to Athens.<a href="#note_175" id="noteref_175" name="noteref_175"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">175</span></span></a></p>
				<p>But the exact date at which the Proerosia or Festival before Ploughing took place is somewhat uncertain, and enquirers are divided in opinion as to whether it fell before or after the Great Mysteries, which began on the fifteenth or sixteenth of Boedromion, a month corresponding roughly to our September. Another name for the festival was Proarcturia, that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“Before Arcturus,”</span><a href="#note_176" id="noteref_176" name="noteref_176"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">176</span></span></a> which points to a date either before the middle of September, when Arcturus is a morning star, or before the end of October, when Arcturus is an evening star.<a href="#note_177" id="noteref_177" name="noteref_177"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">177</span></span></a> In favour of the earlier date it may be said, first, that the morning phase of Arcturus was well known and much observed, because it marked the middle of autumn, whereas little use was made of the evening phase of Arcturus for the purpose of dating;<a href="#note_178" id="noteref_178" name="noteref_178"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">178</span></span></a> and, second, that in an official Athenian inscription the Festival before Ploughing (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="el" xml:lang="el"><span style="font-style: italic">Proerosia</span></span>) is mentioned immediately before the Great Mysteries.<a href="#note_179" id="noteref_179" name="noteref_179"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">179</span></span></a> On the other hand, in favour of the later date, it may be said that as the autumnal rains in Greece set in about the middle of October, the latter part of that month would be a more suitable time for a ceremony at the opening of ploughing than the middle of September, when the soil is still parched with the summer drought; and, second, that this date is confirmed by a Greek inscription of the fourth or third century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, found at Eleusis, in which the Festival before Ploughing is apparently mentioned in the month of Pyanepsion immediately before the festival of the Pyanepsia, which was held on the seventh day of that month.<a href="#note_180" id="noteref_180" name="noteref_180"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">180</span></span></a> It is difficult to decide between these conflicting arguments, but on the whole I incline, not without hesitation, to agree with some eminent modern authorities in placing the Festival before Ploughing in Pyanepsion (October) after the Mysteries, rather than in Boedromion (September) before the Mysteries.<a href="#note_181" id="noteref_181" name="noteref_181"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">181</span></span></a> However, we must bear in mind that as the Attic months, like the Greek months generally, were lunar,<a href="#note_182" id="noteref_182" name="noteref_182"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">182</span></span></a> their position in the solar year necessarily varied from year to year, and though these variations were periodically corrected by intercalation, nevertheless the beginning of each Attic month sometimes diverged by several weeks from the beginning of the corresponding month to which we equate it.<a href="#note_183" id="noteref_183" name="noteref_183"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">183</span></span></a> From this it follows that the Great Mysteries, which were always dated by the calendar month, must have annually shifted their place somewhat in the solar year; whereas the Festival before Ploughing, if it was indeed dated either by the morning or by the evening phase of Arcturus, must have occupied a fixed place in the solar year. Hence it appears to be not impossible that the Great Mysteries, oscillating to and fro with the inconstant moon, may sometimes have fallen before and sometimes after the Festival before Ploughing, which apparently always remained true to the constant star. At least this possibility, which seems to have been overlooked by previous enquirers, deserves to be taken into account. It is a corollary from the shifting dates of the lunar months that the official Greek calendar, in spite of its appearance of exactness, really furnished the ancient farmer with little trustworthy guidance as to the proper seasons for conducting the various operations of agriculture; and he was well advised in trusting to various natural timekeepers, such as the rising and setting of the constellations, the arrival and departure of the migratory birds, the flowering of certain plants,<a href="#note_184" id="noteref_184" name="noteref_184"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">184</span></span></a> the ripening of fruits, and the setting in of the rains, rather than to the fallacious indications of the public calendar. It is by natural timekeepers, and not by calendar months, that Hesiod determines the seasons of the farmer's year in the poem which is the oldest existing treatise on husbandry.<a href="#note_185" id="noteref_185" name="noteref_185"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">185</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Just as the ploughman's prayer to Demeter, before he drove the share through the clods of the field, was taken up and reverberated, so to say, with a great volume of sound in the public prayers which the Athenian state annually offered to the goddess before the ploughing on behalf of the whole world, so the simple first-fruits of barley, presented to the rustic Demeter under the dappled shade of rustling poplars and elms on the threshing-floor in Cos, were repeated year by year on a grander scale in the first-fruits of the barley and wheat harvest, which were presented to the Corn Mother and the Corn Maiden at Eleusis, not merely by every husbandman in Attica, but by all the allies and subjects of Athens far and near, and even by many free Greek communities beyond the sea. The reason why year by year these offerings of grain poured from far countries into the public granaries at Eleusis, was the widespread belief that the gift of corn had been first bestowed by Demeter on the Athenians and afterwards disseminated by them among all mankind through the agency of Triptolemus, who travelled over the world in his dragon-drawn car teaching all peoples to plough the earth and to sow the seed.<a href="#note_186" id="noteref_186" name="noteref_186"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">186</span></span></a> In the fifth century before our era the legend was celebrated by Sophocles in a play called <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Triptolemus</span></span>, in which he represented Demeter instructing the hero to carry the seed of the fruits which she had bestowed on men to all the coasts of Southern Italy,<a href="#note_187" id="noteref_187" name="noteref_187"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">187</span></span></a> from which we may infer that the cities of Magna Graecia were among the number of those that sent the thank-offering of barley and wheat every year to Athens. Again, in the fourth century before our era Xenophon represents Callias, the braggart Eleusinian Torchbearer, addressing the Lacedaemonians in a set speech, in which he declared that <span class="tei tei-q">“Our ancestor Triptolemus is said to have bestowed the seed of Demeter's corn on the Peloponese before any other land. How then,”</span> he asked with pathetic earnestness, <span class="tei tei-q">“can it be right that you should come to ravage the corn of the men from whom you received the seed?”</span><a href="#note_188" id="noteref_188" name="noteref_188"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">188</span></span></a> Again, writing in the fourth century before our era Isocrates relates with a swell of patriotic pride how, in her search for her lost daughter Persephone, the goddess Demeter came to Attica and gave to the ancestors of the Athenians the two greatest of all gifts, the gift of the corn and the gift of the mysteries, of which the one reclaimed men from the life of beasts and the other held out hopes to them of a blissful eternity beyond the grave. The antiquity of the tradition, the orator proceeds to say, was no reason for rejecting it, but quite the contrary it furnished a strong argument in its favour, for what many affirmed and all had heard might be accepted as trustworthy. <span class="tei tei-q">“And moreover,”</span> he adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“we are not driven to rest our case merely on the venerable age of the tradition; we can appeal to stronger evidence in its support. For most of the cities send us every year the first-fruits of the corn as a memorial of that ancient benefit, and when any of them have failed to do so the Pythian priestess has commanded them to send the due portions of the fruits and to act towards our city according to ancestral custom. Can anything be supported by stronger evidence than by the oracle of god, the assent of many Greeks, and the harmony of ancient legend with the deeds of to-day?”</span><a href="#note_189" id="noteref_189" name="noteref_189"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">189</span></span></a></p>
				<p>This testimony of Isocrates to the antiquity both of the legend and of the custom might perhaps have been set aside, or at least disparaged, as the empty bombast of a wordy rhetorician, if it had not happened by good chance to be amply confirmed by an official decree of the Athenian people passed in the century before Isocrates wrote. The decree was found inscribed on a stone at Eleusis and is dated by scholars in the latter half of the fifth century before our era, sometime between 446 and 420 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span><a href="#note_190" id="noteref_190" name="noteref_190"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">190</span></span></a> It deals with the first-fruits of barley and wheat which were offered to the Two Goddesses, that is, to Demeter and Persephone, not only by the Athenians and their allies but by the Greeks in general. It prescribes the exact amount of barley and wheat which was to be offered by the Athenians and their allies, and it directs the highest officials at Eleusis, namely the Hierophant and the Torchbearer, to exhort the other Greeks at the mysteries to offer likewise of the first-fruits of the corn. The authority alleged in the decree for requiring or inviting offerings of first-fruits alike from Athenians and from foreigners is ancestral custom and the bidding of the Delphic oracle. The Senate is further enjoined to send commissioners, so far as it could be done, to all Greek cities whatsoever, exhorting, though not commanding, them to send the first-fruits in compliance with ancestral custom and the bidding of the Delphic oracle, and the state officials are directed to receive the offerings from such states in the same manner as the offerings of the Athenians and their allies. Instructions are also given for the building of three subterranean granaries at Eleusis, where the contributions of grain from Attica were to be stored. The best of the corn was to be offered in sacrifice as the Eumolpids might direct: oxen were to be bought and sacrificed, with gilt horns, not only to the two Goddesses but also to the God (Pluto), Triptolemus, Eubulus, and Athena; and the remainder of the grain was to be sold and with the produce votive offerings were to be dedicated with inscriptions setting forth that they had been dedicated from the offerings of first-fruits, and recording the names of all the Greeks who sent the offerings to Eleusis. The decree ends with a prayer that all who comply with these injunctions or exhortations and render their dues to the city of Athens and to the Two Goddesses, may enjoy prosperity together with good and abundant crops. Writing in the second century of our era, under the Roman empire, the rhetorician Aristides records the custom which the Greeks observed of sending year by year the first-fruits of the harvest to Athens in gratitude for the corn, but he speaks of the practice as a thing of the past.<a href="#note_191" id="noteref_191" name="noteref_191"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">191</span></span></a></p>
				<p>We may suspect that the tribute of corn ceased to flow from far countries to Athens, when, with her falling fortunes and decaying empire, her proud galleys had ceased to carry the terror of the Athenian arms into distant seas. But if the homage was no longer paid in the substantial shape of cargoes of grain, it continued down to the latest days of paganism to be paid in the cheaper form of gratitude for that inestimable benefit, which the Athenians claimed to have received from the Corn Goddess and to have liberally communicated to the rest of mankind. Even the Sicilians, who, inhabiting a fertile corn-growing island, worshipped Demeter and Persephone above all the gods and claimed to have been the first to receive the gift of the corn from the Corn Goddess,<a href="#note_192" id="noteref_192" name="noteref_192"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">192</span></span></a> nevertheless freely acknowledged that the Athenians had spread, though they had not originated, the useful discovery among the nations. Thus the patriotic Sicilian historian Diodorus, while giving the precedence to his fellow-countrymen, strives to be just to the Athenian pretensions in the following passage.<a href="#note_193" id="noteref_193" name="noteref_193"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">193</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Mythologists,”</span> says he, <span class="tei tei-q">“relate that Demeter, unable to find her daughter, lit torches at the craters of Etna<a href="#note_194" id="noteref_194" name="noteref_194"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">194</span></span></a> and roamed over many parts of the world. Those people who received her best she rewarded by giving them in return the fruit of the wheat; and because the Athenians welcomed her most kindly of all, she bestowed the fruit of the wheat on them next after the Sicilians. Wherefore that people honoured the goddess more than any other folk by magnificent sacrifices and the mysteries at Eleusis, which for their extreme antiquity and sanctity have become famous among all men. From the Athenians many others received the boon of the corn and shared the seed with their neighbours, till they filled the whole inhabited earth with it. But as the people of Sicily, on account of the intimate relation in which they stood to Demeter and the Maiden, were the first to participate in the newly discovered corn, they appointed sacrifices and popular festivities in honour of each of the two goddesses, naming the celebrations after them and signifying the nature of the boons they had received by the dates of the festivals. For they celebrated the bringing home of the Maiden at the time when the corn was ripe, performing the sacrifice and holding the festivity with all the solemnity and zeal that might be reasonably expected of men who desired to testify their gratitude for so signal a gift bestowed on them before all the rest of mankind. But the sacrifice to Demeter they assigned to the time when the sowing of the corn begins; and for ten days they hold a popular festivity which bears the name of the goddess, and is remarkable as well for the magnificence of its pomp as for the costumes then worn in imitation of the olden time. During these days it is customary for people to rail at each other in foul language, because when Demeter was mourning for the rape of the Maiden she laughed at a ribald jest.”</span><a href="#note_195" id="noteref_195" name="noteref_195"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">195</span></span></a> Thus despite his natural prepossession in favour of his native land, Diodorus bears testimony both to the special blessing bestowed on the Athenians by the Corn Goddess, and to the generosity with which they had imparted the blessing to others, until it gradually spread to the ends of the earth. Again, Cicero, addressing a Roman audience, enumerates among the benefits which Athens was believed to have conferred on the world, the gift of the corn and its origin in Attic soil; and the cursory manner in which he alludes to it seems to prove that the tradition was familiar to his hearers.<a href="#note_196" id="noteref_196" name="noteref_196"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">196</span></span></a> Four centuries later the rhetorician Himerius speaks of Demeter's gift of the corn and the mysteries to the Athenians as the source of the first and greatest service rendered by their city to mankind;<a href="#note_197" id="noteref_197" name="noteref_197"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">197</span></span></a> so ancient, widespread, and persistent was the legend which ascribed the origin of the corn to the goddess Demeter and associated it with the institution of the Eleusinian mysteries. No wonder that the Delphic oracle called Athens <span class="tei tei-q">“the Metropolis of the Corn.”</span><a href="#note_198" id="noteref_198" name="noteref_198"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">198</span></span></a></p>
				<p>From the passage of Diodorus which I have quoted we learn that the Sicilians celebrated the festival of Demeter at the beginning of sowing, and the festival of Persephone at harvest. This proves that they associated, if they did not identify, the Mother Goddess with the seed-corn and the Daughter Goddess with the ripe ears. Could any association or identification be more easy and obvious to people who personified the processes of nature under the form of anthropomorphic deities? As the seed brings forth the ripe ear, so the Corn Mother Demeter gave birth to the Corn Daughter Persephone. It is true that difficulties arise when we attempt to analyse this seemingly simple conception. How, for example, are we to divide exactly the two persons of the divinity? At what precise moment does the seed cease to be the Corn Mother and begins to burgeon out into the Corn Daughter? And how far can we identify the material substance of the barley and wheat with the divine bodies of the Two Goddesses? Questions of this sort probably gave little concern to the sturdy swains who ploughed, sowed, and reaped the fat fields of Sicily. We cannot imagine that their night's rest was disturbed by uneasy meditations on these knotty problems. It would hardly be strange if the muzzy mind of the Sicilian bumpkin, who looked with blind devotion to the Two Goddesses for his daily bread, totally failed to distinguish Demeter from the seed and Persephone from the ripe sheaves, and if he accepted implicitly the doctrine of the real presence of the divinities in the corn without discriminating too curiously between the material and the spiritual properties of the barley or the wheat. And if he had been closely questioned by a rigid logician as to the exact distinction to be drawn between the two persons of the godhead who together represented for him the annual vicissitudes of the cereals, Hodge might have scratched his head and confessed that it puzzled him to say where precisely the one goddess ended and the other began, or why the seed buried in the ground should figure at one time as the dead daughter Persephone descending into the nether world, and at another as the living Mother Demeter about to give birth to next year's crop. Theological subtleties like these have posed longer heads than are commonly to be found on bucolic shoulders.</p>
				<p>The time of year at which the first-fruits were offered to Demeter and Persephone at Eleusis is not explicitly mentioned by ancient authorities, and accordingly no inference can be drawn from the date of the offering as to its religious significance. It is true that at the Eleusinian mysteries the Hierophant and Torchbearer publicly exhorted the Greeks in general, as distinguished from the Athenians and their allies, to offer the first-fruits in accordance with ancestral custom and the bidding of the Delphic oracle.<a href="#note_199" id="noteref_199" name="noteref_199"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">199</span></span></a> But there is nothing to shew that the offerings were made immediately after the exhortation. Nor does any ancient authority support the view of a modern scholar that the offering of the first-fruits, or a portion of them, took place at the Festival before Ploughing (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="el" xml:lang="el"><span style="font-style: italic">Proerosia</span></span>),<a href="#note_200" id="noteref_200" name="noteref_200"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">200</span></span></a> though that festival would no doubt be an eminently appropriate occasion for propitiating with such offerings the goddess on whose bounty the next year's crop was believed to depend.</p>
				<p>On the other hand, we are positively told that the first-fruits were carried to Eleusis to be used at the Festival of the Threshing-floor (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="el" xml:lang="el"><span style="font-style: italic">Haloa</span></span>).<a href="#note_201" id="noteref_201" name="noteref_201"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">201</span></span></a> But the statement, cursorily reported by writers of no very high authority, cannot be implicitly relied upon; and even if it could, we should hardly be justified in inferring from it that all the first-fruits of the corn were offered to Demeter and Persephone at this festival. Be that as it may, the Festival of the Threshing-floor was intimately connected with the worship both of Demeter and of Dionysus, and accordingly it deserves our attention. It is said to have been sacred to both these deities;<a href="#note_202" id="noteref_202" name="noteref_202"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">202</span></span></a> and while the name seems to connect it rather with the Corn Goddess than with the Wine God, we are yet informed that it was held by the Athenians on the occasion of the pruning of the vines and the tasting of the stored-up wine.<a href="#note_203" id="noteref_203" name="noteref_203"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">203</span></span></a> The festival is frequently mentioned in Eleusinian inscriptions, from some of which we gather that it included sacrifices to the two goddesses and a so-called Ancestral Contest, as to the nature of which we have no information.<a href="#note_204" id="noteref_204" name="noteref_204"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">204</span></span></a> We may suppose that the festival or some part of it was celebrated on the Sacred Threshing-floor of Triptolemus at Eleusis;<a href="#note_205" id="noteref_205" name="noteref_205"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">205</span></span></a> for as Triptolemus was the hero who is said to have diffused the knowledge of the corn all over the world, nothing could be more natural than that the Festival of the Threshing-floor should be held on the sacred threshing-floor which bore his name. As for Demeter, we have already seen how intimate was her association with the threshing-floor and the operation of threshing; according to Homer, she is the yellow goddess who parts the yellow grain from the white chaff at the threshing, and in Cos her image with the corn-stalks and the poppies in her hands stood on the threshing-floor.<a href="#note_206" id="noteref_206" name="noteref_206"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">206</span></span></a> The festival lasted one day, and no victims might be sacrificed at it;<a href="#note_207" id="noteref_207" name="noteref_207"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">207</span></span></a> but special use was made, as we have seen, of the first-fruits of the corn. With regard to the dating of the festival we are informed that it fell in the month Poseideon, which corresponds roughly to our December, and as the date rests on the high authority of the ancient Athenian antiquary Philochorus,<a href="#note_208" id="noteref_208" name="noteref_208"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">208</span></span></a> and is, moreover, indirectly confirmed by inscriptional evidence,<a href="#note_209" id="noteref_209" name="noteref_209"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">209</span></span></a> we are bound to accept it. But it is certainly surprising to find a Festival of the Threshing-floor held so late in the year, long after the threshing, which in Greece usually takes place not later than midsummer, though on high ground in Crete it is sometimes prolonged till near the end of August.<a href="#note_210" id="noteref_210" name="noteref_210"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">210</span></span></a> We seem bound to conclude that the Festival of the Threshing-floor was quite distinct from the actual threshing of the corn.<a href="#note_211" id="noteref_211" name="noteref_211"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">211</span></span></a> It is said to have included certain mystic rites performed by women alone, who feasted and quaffed wine, while they broke filthy jests on each other and exhibited cakes baked in the form of the male and female organs of generation.<a href="#note_212" id="noteref_212" name="noteref_212"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">212</span></span></a> If the latter particulars are correctly reported we may suppose that these indecencies, like certain obscenities which seem to have formed part of the Great Mysteries at Eleusis,<a href="#note_213" id="noteref_213" name="noteref_213"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">213</span></span></a> were no mere wanton outbursts of licentious passion, but were deliberately practised as rites calculated to promote the fertility of the ground by means of homoeopathic or imitative magic. A like association of what we might call indecency with rites intended to promote the growth of the crops meets us in the Thesmophoria, a festival of Demeter celebrated by women alone, at which the character of the goddess as a source of fertility comes out clearly in the custom of mixing the remains of the sacrificial pigs with the seed-corn in order to obtain a plentiful crop. We shall return to this festival later on.<a href="#note_214" id="noteref_214" name="noteref_214"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">214</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Other festivals held at Eleusis in honour of Demeter and Persephone were known as the Green Festival and the Festival of the Cornstalks.<a href="#note_215" id="noteref_215" name="noteref_215"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">215</span></span></a> Of the manner of their celebration we know nothing except that they comprised sacrifices, which were offered to Demeter and Persephone. But their names suffice to connect the two festivals with the green and the standing corn. We have seen that Demeter herself bore the title of Green, and that sacrifices were offered to her under that title which plainly aimed at promoting fertility.<a href="#note_216" id="noteref_216" name="noteref_216"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">216</span></span></a> Among the many epithets applied to Demeter which mark her relation to the corn may further be mentioned <span class="tei tei-q">“Wheat-lover,”</span><a href="#note_217" id="noteref_217" name="noteref_217"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">217</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Corn,”</span><a href="#note_218" id="noteref_218" name="noteref_218"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">218</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Sheaf-bearer,”</span><a href="#note_219" id="noteref_219" name="noteref_219"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">219</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Threshing-floor,”</span><a href="#note_220" id="noteref_220" name="noteref_220"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">220</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Winnowing-fan,”</span><a href="#note_221" id="noteref_221" name="noteref_221"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">221</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Nurse of the Corn-ears,”</span><a href="#note_222" id="noteref_222" name="noteref_222"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">222</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Crowned with Ears of Corn,”</span><a href="#note_223" id="noteref_223" name="noteref_223"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">223</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Seed,”</span><a href="#note_224" id="noteref_224" name="noteref_224"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">224</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Green Fruits,”</span><a href="#note_225" id="noteref_225" name="noteref_225"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">225</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Heavy with Summer Fruits,”</span><a href="#note_226" id="noteref_226" name="noteref_226"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">226</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“Fruit-bearer,”</span><a href="#note_227" id="noteref_227" name="noteref_227"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">227</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Great Loaf,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“She of the Great Barley Loaf.”</span><a href="#note_228" id="noteref_228" name="noteref_228"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">228</span></span></a> Of these epithets it may be remarked that though all of them are quite appropriate to a Corn Goddess, some of them would scarcely be applicable to an Earth Goddess and therefore they add weight to the other arguments which turn the scale in favour of the corn as the fundamental attribute of Demeter.</p>
				<p>How deeply implanted in the mind of the ancient Greeks was this faith in Demeter as goddess of the corn may be judged by the circumstance that the faith actually persisted among their Christian descendants at her old sanctuary of Eleusis down to the beginning of the nineteenth century. For when the English traveller Dodwell revisited Eleusis, the inhabitants lamented to him the loss of a colossal image of Demeter, which was carried off by Clarke in 1802 and presented to the University of Cambridge, where it still remains. <span class="tei tei-q">“In my first journey to Greece,”</span> says Dodwell, <span class="tei tei-q">“this protecting deity was in its full glory, situated in the centre of a threshing-floor, amongst the ruins of her temple. The villagers were impressed with a persuasion that their rich harvests were the effect of her bounty, and since her removal, their abundance, as they assured me, has disappeared.”</span><a href="#note_229" id="noteref_229" name="noteref_229"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">229</span></span></a> Thus we see the Corn Goddess Demeter standing on the threshing-floor of Eleusis and dispensing corn to her worshippers in the nineteenth century of the Christian era, precisely as her image stood and dispensed corn to her worshippers on the threshing-floor of Cos in the days of Theocritus. And just as the people of Eleusis last century attributed the diminution of their harvests to the loss of the image of Demeter, so in antiquity the Sicilians, a corn-growing people devoted to the worship of the two Corn Goddesses, lamented that the crops of many towns had perished because the unscrupulous Roman governor Verres had impiously carried off the image of Demeter from her famous temple at Henna.<a href="#note_230" id="noteref_230" name="noteref_230"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">230</span></span></a> Could we ask for a clearer proof that Demeter was indeed the goddess of the corn than this belief, held by the Greeks down to modern times, that the corn-crops depended on her presence and bounty and perished when her image was removed?</p>
				<p>In a former part of this work I followed an eminent French scholar in concluding, from various indications, that part of the religious drama performed in the mysteries of Eleusis may have been a marriage between the sky-god Zeus and the corn-goddess Demeter, represented by the hierophant and the priestess of the goddess respectively.<a href="#note_231" id="noteref_231" name="noteref_231"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">231</span></span></a> The conclusion is arrived at by combining a number of passages, all more or less vague and indefinite, of late Christian writers; hence it must remain to some extent uncertain and cannot at the best lay claim to more than a fair degree of probability. It may be, as Professor W. Ridgeway holds, that this dramatic marriage of the god and goddess was an innovation foisted into the Eleusinian Mysteries in that great welter of religions which followed the meeting of the East and the West in the later ages of antiquity.<a href="#note_232" id="noteref_232" name="noteref_232"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">232</span></span></a> If a marriage of Zeus and Demeter did indeed form an important feature of the Mysteries in the fifth century before our era, it is certainly remarkable, as Professor Ridgeway has justly pointed out, that no mention of Zeus occurs in the public decree of that century which regulates the offerings of first-fruits and the sacrifices to be made to the gods and goddesses of Eleusis.<a href="#note_233" id="noteref_233" name="noteref_233"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">233</span></span></a> At the same time we must bear in mind that, if the evidence for the ritual marriage of Zeus and Demeter is late and doubtful, the evidence for the myth is ancient and indubitable. The story was known to Homer, for in the list of beauties to whom he makes Zeus, in a burst of candour, confess that he had lost his too susceptible heart, there occurs the name of <span class="tei tei-q">“the fair-haired Queen Demeter”</span>;<a href="#note_234" id="noteref_234" name="noteref_234"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">234</span></span></a> and in another passage the poet represents the jealous god smiting with a thunderbolt the favoured lover with whom the goddess had forgotten her dignity among the furrows of a fallow field.<a href="#note_235" id="noteref_235" name="noteref_235"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">235</span></span></a> Moreover, according to one tradition, Dionysus himself was the offspring of the intrigue between Zeus and Demeter.<a href="#note_236" id="noteref_236" name="noteref_236"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">236</span></span></a> Thus there is no intrinsic improbability in the view that one or other of these unedifying incidents in the backstairs chronicle of Olympus should have formed part of the sacred peep-show in the Eleusinian Mysteries. But it seems just possible that the marriage to which the Christian writers allude with malicious joy may after all have been of a more regular and orthodox pattern. We are positively told that the rape of Persephone was acted at the Mysteries;<a href="#note_237" id="noteref_237" name="noteref_237"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">237</span></span></a> may that scene not have been followed by another representing the solemnisation of her nuptials with her ravisher and husband Pluto? It is to be remembered that Pluto was sometimes known as a god of fertility under the title of Subterranean Zeus. It was to him under that title as well as to Demeter, that the Greek ploughman prayed at the beginning of the ploughing;<a href="#note_238" id="noteref_238" name="noteref_238"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">238</span></span></a> and the people of Myconus used to sacrifice to Subterranean Zeus and Subterranean Earth for the prosperity of the crops on the twelfth day of the month Lenaeon.<a href="#note_239" id="noteref_239" name="noteref_239"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">239</span></span></a> Thus it may be that the Zeus whose marriage was dramatically represented at the Mysteries was not the sky-god Zeus, but his brother Zeus of the Underworld, and that the writers who refer to the ceremony have confused the two brothers. This view, if it could be established, would dispose of the difficulty raised by the absence of the name of Zeus in the decree which prescribes the offerings to be made to the gods of Eleusis; for although in that decree Pluto is not mentioned under the name of Subterranean Zeus, he is clearly referred to, as the editors of the inscription have seen, under the vague title of <span class="tei tei-q">“the God,”</span> while his consort Persephone is similarly referred to under the title of <span class="tei tei-q">“the Goddess,”</span> and it is ordained that perfect victims shall be sacrificed to both of them. However, if we thus dispose of one difficulty, it must be confessed that in doing so we raise another. For if the bridegroom in the Sacred Marriage at Eleusis was not the sky-god Zeus, but the earth-god Pluto, we seem driven to suppose that, contrary to the opinion of the reverend Christian scandal-mongers, the bride was his lawful wife Persephone and not his sister and mother-in-law Demeter. In short, on the hypothesis which I have suggested we are compelled to conclude that the ancient busybodies who lifted the veil from the mystic marriage were mistaken as to the person both of the divine bridegroom and of the divine bride. In regard to the bridegroom I have conjectured that they may have confused the two brothers, Zeus of the Upper World and Zeus of the Lower World. In regard to the bride, can any reason be suggested for confounding the persons of the mother and daughter? On the view here taken of the nature of Demeter and Persephone nothing could be easier than to confuse them with each other, for both of them were mythical embodiments of the corn, the mother Demeter standing for the old corn of last year and the daughter Persephone standing for the new corn of this year. In point of fact Greek artists, both of the archaic and of later periods, frequently represent the Mother and Daughter side by side in forms which resemble each other so closely that eminent modern experts have sometimes differed from each other on the question, which is Demeter and which is Persephone; indeed in some cases it might be quite impossible to distinguish the two if it were not for the inscriptions attached to the figures.<a href="#note_240" id="noteref_240" name="noteref_240"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">240</span></span></a> The ancient sculptors, vase-painters, and engravers must have had some good reason for portraying the two goddesses in types which are almost indistinguishable from each other; and what better reason could they have had than the knowledge that the two persons of the godhead were one in substance, that they stood merely for two different aspects of the same simple natural phenomenon, the growth of the corn? Thus it is easy to understand why Demeter and Persephone may have been confused in ritual as well as in art, why in particular the part of the divine bride in a Sacred Marriage may sometimes have been assigned to the Mother and sometimes to the Daughter. But all this, I fully admit, is a mere speculation, and I only put it forward as such. We possess far too little information as to a Sacred Marriage in the Eleusinian Mysteries to be justified in speaking with confidence on so obscure a subject.</p>
				<p>One thing, however, which we may say with a fair degree of probability is that, if such a marriage did take place at Eleusis, no date in the agricultural year could well have been more appropriate for it than the date at which the Mysteries actually fell, namely about the middle of September. The long Greek summer is practically rainless and in the fervent heat and unbroken drought all nature languishes. The river-beds are dry, the fields parched. The farmer awaits impatiently the setting-in of the autumnal rains, which begin in October and mark the great season for ploughing and sowing. What time could be fitter for celebrating the union of the Corn Goddess with her husband the Earth God or perhaps rather with her paramour the Sky God, who will soon descend in fertilising showers to quicken the seed in the furrows? Such embraces of the divine powers or their human representatives might well be deemed, on the principles of homoeopathic or imitative magic, indispensable to the growth of the crops. At least similar ideas have been entertained and similar customs have been practised by many peoples;<a href="#note_241" id="noteref_241" name="noteref_241"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">241</span></span></a> and in the legend of Demeter's love-adventure among the furrows of the thrice-ploughed fallow<a href="#note_242" id="noteref_242" name="noteref_242"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">242</span></span></a> we seem to catch a glimpse of rude rites of the same sort performed in the fields at sowing-time by Greek ploughmen for the sake of ensuring the growth of the seed which they were about to commit to the bosom of the naked earth. In this connexion a statement of ancient writers as to the rites of Eleusis receives fresh significance. We are told that at these rites the worshippers looked up to the sky and cried <span class="tei tei-q">“Rain!”</span> and then looked down at the earth and cried <span class="tei tei-q">“Conceive!”</span><a href="#note_243" id="noteref_243" name="noteref_243"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">243</span></span></a> Nothing could be more appropriate at a marriage of the Sky God and the Earth or Corn Goddess than such invocations to the heaven to pour down rain and to the earth or the corn to conceive seed under the fertilising shower; in Greece no time could well be more suitable for the utterance of such prayers than just at the date when the Great Mysteries of Eleusis were celebrated, at the end of the long drought of summer and before the first rains of autumn.</p>
				<p>Different both from the Great Mysteries and the offerings of first-fruits at Eleusis were the games which were celebrated there on a great scale once in every four years and on a less scale once in every two years.<a href="#note_244" id="noteref_244" name="noteref_244"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">244</span></span></a> That the games were distinct from the Mysteries is proved by their periods, which were quadriennial and biennial respectively, whereas the Mysteries were celebrated annually. Moreover, in Greek epigraphy, our most authentic evidence in such matters, the games and the Mysteries are clearly distinguished from each other by being mentioned separately in the same inscription.<a href="#note_245" id="noteref_245" name="noteref_245"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">245</span></span></a> But like the Mysteries the games seem to have been very ancient; for the Parian Chronicler, who wrote in the year 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, assigns the foundation of the Eleusinian games to the reign of Pandion, the son of Cecrops. However, he represents them as of later origin than the Eleusinian Mysteries, which according to him were instituted by Eumolpus in the reign of Erechtheus, after Demeter had planted corn in Attica and Triptolemus had sown seed in the Rarian plain at Eleusis.<a href="#note_246" id="noteref_246" name="noteref_246"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">246</span></span></a> This testimony to the superior antiquity of the Mysteries is in harmony with our most ancient authority on the rites of Eleusis, the author of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hymn to Demeter</span></span>, who describes the origin of the Eleusinian Mysteries, but makes no reference or allusion to the Eleusinian Games. However, the great age of the games is again vouched for at a much later date by the rhetorician Aristides, who even declares that they were the oldest of all Greek games.<a href="#note_247" id="noteref_247" name="noteref_247"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">247</span></span></a> With regard to the nature and meaning of the games our information is extremely scanty, but an old scholiast on Pindar tells us that they were celebrated in honour of Demeter and Persephone as a thank-offering at the conclusion of the corn-harvest.<a href="#note_248" id="noteref_248" name="noteref_248"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">248</span></span></a> His testimony is confirmed by that of the rhetorician Aristides, who mentions the institution of the Eleusinian games in immediate connexion with the offerings of the first-fruits of the corn, which many Greek states sent to Athens;<a href="#note_249" id="noteref_249" name="noteref_249"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">249</span></span></a> and from an inscription dated about the close of the third century before our era we learn that at the Great Eleusinian Games sacrifices were offered to Demeter and Persephone.<a href="#note_250" id="noteref_250" name="noteref_250"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">250</span></span></a> Further, we gather from an official Athenian inscription of 329 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> that both the Great and the Lesser Games included athletic and musical contests, a horse-race, and a competition which bore the name of the Ancestral or Hereditary Contest, and which accordingly may well have formed the original kernel of the games.<a href="#note_251" id="noteref_251" name="noteref_251"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">251</span></span></a> Unfortunately nothing is known about this Ancestral Contest. We might be tempted to identify it with the Ancestral Contest included in the Eleusinian Festival of the Threshing-floor,<a href="#note_252" id="noteref_252" name="noteref_252"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">252</span></span></a> which was probably held on the Sacred Threshing-floor of Triptolemus at Eleusis.<a href="#note_253" id="noteref_253" name="noteref_253"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">253</span></span></a> If the identification could be proved, we should have another confirmation of the tradition which connects the games with Demeter and the corn; for according to the prevalent tradition it was to Triptolemus that Demeter first revealed the secret of the corn, and it was he whom she sent out as an itinerant missionary to impart the beneficent discovery of the cereals to all mankind and to teach them to sow the seed.<a href="#note_254" id="noteref_254" name="noteref_254"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">254</span></span></a> On monuments of art, especially in vase-paintings, he is constantly represented along with Demeter in this capacity, holding corn-stalks in his hand and sitting in his car, which is sometimes winged and sometimes drawn by dragons, and from which he is said to have sowed the seed down on the whole world as he sped through the air.<a href="#note_255" id="noteref_255" name="noteref_255"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">255</span></span></a> At Eleusis victims bought with the first-fruits of the wheat and barley were sacrificed to him as well as to Demeter and Persephone.<a href="#note_256" id="noteref_256" name="noteref_256"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">256</span></span></a> In short, if we may judge from the combined testimony of Greek literature and art, Triptolemus was the corn-hero first and foremost. Even beyond the limits of the Greek world, all men, we are told, founded sanctuaries and erected altars in his honour because he had bestowed on them the gift of the corn.<a href="#note_257" id="noteref_257" name="noteref_257"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">257</span></span></a> His very name has been plausibly explained both in ancient and modern times as <span class="tei tei-q">“Thrice-ploughed”</span> with reference to the Greek custom of ploughing the land thrice a year,<a href="#note_258" id="noteref_258" name="noteref_258"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">258</span></span></a> and the derivation is said to be on philological principles free from objection.<a href="#note_259" id="noteref_259" name="noteref_259"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">259</span></span></a> In fact it would seem as if Triptolemus, like Demeter and Persephone themselves, were a purely mythical being, an embodiment of the conception of the first sower. At all events in the local Eleusinian legend, according to an eminent scholar, who has paid special attention to Attic genealogy, <span class="tei tei-q">“Triptolemus does not, like his comrade Eumolpus or other founders of Eleusinian priestly families, continue his kind, but without leaving offspring who might perpetuate his priestly office, he is removed from the scene of his beneficent activity. As he appeared, so he vanishes again from the legend, after he has fulfilled his divine mission.”</span><a href="#note_260" id="noteref_260" name="noteref_260"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">260</span></span></a></p>
				<p>However, there is no sufficient ground for identifying the Ancestral Contest of the Eleusinian games with the Ancestral Contest of the Threshing-festival at Eleusis, and accordingly the connexion of the games with the corn-harvest and with the corn-hero Triptolemus must so far remain uncertain. But a clear trace of such a connexion may be seen in the custom of rewarding the victors in the Eleusinian games with measures of barley; in the official Athenian inscription of 329 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, which contains the accounts of the superintendents of Eleusis and the Treasurers of the Two Goddesses, the amounts of corn handed over by these officers to the priests and priestesses for the purposes of the games is exactly specified.<a href="#note_261" id="noteref_261" name="noteref_261"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">261</span></span></a> This of itself is sufficient to prove that the Eleusinian games were closely connected with the worship of Demeter and Persephone. The grain thus distributed in prizes was probably reaped on the Rarian plain near Eleusis, where according to the legend Triptolemus sowed the first corn.<a href="#note_262" id="noteref_262" name="noteref_262"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">262</span></span></a> Certainly we know that the barley grown on that plain was used in sacrifices and for the baking of the sacrificial cakes,<a href="#note_263" id="noteref_263" name="noteref_263"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">263</span></span></a> from which we may reasonably infer that the prizes of barley, to which no doubt a certain sanctity attached in the popular mind, were brought from the same holy fields. So sacred was the Rarian plain that no dead body was allowed to defile it. When such a pollution accidentally took place, it was expiated by the sacrifice of a pig,<a href="#note_264" id="noteref_264" name="noteref_264"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">264</span></span></a> the usual victim employed in Greek purificatory rites.</p>
				<p>Thus, so far as the scanty evidence at our disposal permits us to judge, the Eleusinian games, like the Eleusinian Mysteries, would seem to have been primarily concerned with Demeter and Persephone as goddesses of the corn. At least that is expressly affirmed by the old scholiast on Pindar and it is borne out by the practice of rewarding the victors with measures of barley. Perhaps the Ancestral Contest, which may well have formed the original nucleus of the games, was a contest between the reapers on the sacred Rarian plain to see who should finish his allotted task before his fellows. For success in such a contest no prize could be more appropriate than a measure of the sacred barley which the victorious reaper had just cut on the barley-field. In the sequel we shall see that similar contests between reapers have been common on the harvest fields of modern Europe, and it will appear that such competitions are not purely athletic; their aim is not simply to demonstrate the superior strength, activity, and skill of the victors; it is to secure for the particular farm the possession of the blooming young Corn-maiden of the present year, conceived as the embodiment of the vigorous grain, and to pass on to laggard neighbours the aged Corn-mother of the past year, conceived as an embodiment of the effete and outworn energies of the corn.<a href="#note_265" id="noteref_265" name="noteref_265"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">265</span></span></a> May it not have been so at Eleusis? may not the reapers have vied with each other for possession of the young corn-spirit Persephone and for avoidance of the old corn-spirit Demeter? may not the prize of barley, which rewarded the victor in the Ancestral Contest, have been supposed to house in the ripe ears no less a personage than the Corn-maiden Persephone herself? And if there is any truth in these conjectures (for conjectures they are and nothing more), we may hazard a guess as to the other Ancestral Contest which took place at the Eleusinian Festival of the Threshing-floor. Perhaps it in like manner was originally a competition between threshers on the sacred threshing-floor of Triptolemus to determine who should finish threshing his allotted quantity of corn before the rest. Such competitions have also been common, as we shall see presently, on the threshing-floors of modern Europe, and their motive again has not been simple emulation between sturdy swains for the reward of strength and dexterity; it has been a dread of being burdened with the aged and outworn spirit of the corn conceived as present in the bundle of corn-stalks which receives the last stroke at threshing.<a href="#note_266" id="noteref_266" name="noteref_266"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">266</span></span></a> We know that effigies of Demeter with corn and poppies in her hands stood on Greek threshing-floors.<a href="#note_267" id="noteref_267" name="noteref_267"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">267</span></span></a> Perhaps at the conclusion of the threshing these effigies, as representatives of the old Corn-spirit, were passed on to neighbours who had not yet finished threshing the corn. At least the supposition is in harmony with modern customs observed on the threshing-floor.</p>
				<p>It is possible that the Eleusinian games were no more than a popular merrymaking celebrated at the close of the harvest. This view of their character might be supported by modern analogies; for in some parts of Germany it has been customary for the harvesters, when their work is done, to engage in athletic competitions of various kinds, which have at first sight no very obvious connexion with the business of harvesting. For example, at Besbau near Luckau great cakes were baked at the harvest-festival, and the labourers, both men and women, ran races for them. He or she who reached them first received not only a cake, but a handkerchief or the like as a prize. Again, at Bergkirchen, when the harvest was over, a garland was hung up and the harvesters rode at it on horseback and tried to bring it down with a stab or a blow as they galloped past. He who succeeded in bringing it down was proclaimed King. Again, in the villages near Fürstenwald at harvest the young men used to fetch a fir-tree from the wood, peel the trunk, and set it up like a mast in the middle of the village. A handkerchief and other prizes were fastened to the top of the pole and the men clambered up for them.<a href="#note_268" id="noteref_268" name="noteref_268"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">268</span></span></a> Among the peasantry of Silesia, we are told, the harvest-home broadened out into a popular festival, in which athletic sports figured prominently. Thus, for example, at Järischau, in the Strehlitz district, a scythe, a rake, a flail, and a hay-fork or pitchfork were fastened to the top of a smooth pole and awarded as prizes, in order of merit, to the men who displayed most agility in climbing the pole. Younger men amused themselves with running in sacks, high jumps, and so forth. At Prauss, near Nimptsch, the girls ran a race in a field for aprons as prizes. In the central parts of Silesia a favourite amusement at harvest was a race between girls for a garland of leaves or flowers.<a href="#note_269" id="noteref_269" name="noteref_269"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">269</span></span></a> Yet it seems probable that all such sports at harvest were in origin not mere pastimes, but that they were serious attempts to secure in one way or another the help and blessing of the corn-spirit. Thus in some parts of Prussia, at the close of the rye-harvest, a few sheaves used to be left standing in the field after all the rest of the rye had been carted home. These sheaves were then made up into the shape of a man and dressed out in masculine costume, and all the young women were obliged to run a race, of which the corn-man was the goal. She who won the race led off the dancing in the evening.<a href="#note_270" id="noteref_270" name="noteref_270"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">270</span></span></a> Here the aim of the foot-race among the young women is clearly to secure the corn-spirit embodied in the last sheaf left standing on the field; for, as we shall see later on, the last sheaf is commonly supposed to harbour the corn-spirit and is treated accordingly like a man or a woman.<a href="#note_271" id="noteref_271" name="noteref_271"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">271</span></span></a></p>
				<p>If the Ancestral Contest at the Eleusinian games was, as I have conjectured, a contest between the reapers on the sacred barley-field, we should have to suppose that the games were celebrated at barley-harvest, which in the lowlands of Greece falls in May or even at the end of April. This theory is in harmony with the evidence of the scholiast on Pindar, who tells us that the Eleusinian games were celebrated after the corn-harvest.<a href="#note_272" id="noteref_272" name="noteref_272"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">272</span></span></a> No other ancient authority, so far as I am aware, mentions at what time of the year these games were held. Modern authorities, arguing from certain slight and to some extent conjectural data, have variously assigned them to Metageitnion (August) and to Boedromion (September), and those who assign them to Boedromion (September) are divided in opinion as to whether they preceded or followed the Mysteries.<a href="#note_273" id="noteref_273" name="noteref_273"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">273</span></span></a> However, the evidence is far too slender and uncertain to allow of any conclusions being based on it.</p>
				<p>But there is a serious difficulty in the way of connecting the Eleusinian games with the goddesses of the corn. How is the quadriennial or the biennial period of the games to be reconciled with the annual growth of the crops? Year by year the barley and the wheat are sown and reaped; how then could the games, held only every fourth or every second year, have been regarded as thank-offerings for the annual harvest? On this view of their nature, which is the one taken by the old scholiast on Pindar, though the harvest was received at the hands of the Corn Goddess punctually every year, men thanked her for her bounty only every second year or even only every fourth year. What were her feelings likely to be in the blank years when she got no thanks and no games? She might naturally resent such negligence and ingratitude and punish them by forbidding the seed to sprout, just as she did at Eleusis when she mourned the loss of her daughter. In short, men could hardly expect to reap crops in years in which they offered nothing to the Corn Goddess. That would indeed appear to be the view generally taken by the ancient Greeks; for we have seen that year by year they presented the first-fruits of the barley and the wheat to Demeter, not merely in the solemn state ritual of Eleusis, but also in rustic festivals held by farmers on their threshing-floors. The pious Greek husbandman would no doubt have been shocked and horrified at a proposal to pay the Corn Goddess her dues only every second or fourth year. <span class="tei tei-q">“No offerings, no crops,”</span> he would say to himself, and would anticipate nothing but dearth and famine in any year when he failed to satisfy the just and lawful demands of the divinity on whose good pleasure he believed the growth of the corn to be directly dependent. Accordingly we may regard it as highly probable that from the very beginning of settled and regular agriculture in Greece men annually propitiated the deities of the corn with a ritual of some sort, and rendered them their dues in the shape of offerings of the ripe barley and wheat. Now we know that the Mysteries of Eleusis were celebrated every year, and accordingly, if I am right in interpreting them as essentially a dramatic representation of the annual vicissitudes of the corn performed for the purpose of quickening the seed, it becomes probable that in some form or another they were annually held at Eleusis long before the practice arose of celebrating games there every fourth or every second year. In short, the Eleusinian mysteries were in all probability far older than the Eleusinian games. How old they were we cannot even guess. But when we consider that the cultivation of barley and wheat, the two cereals specially associated with Demeter, appears to have been practised in prehistoric Europe from the Stone Age onwards,<a href="#note_274" id="noteref_274" name="noteref_274"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">274</span></span></a> we shall be disposed to admit that the annual performance of religious or magical rites at Eleusis for the purpose of ensuring good crops, whether by propitiating the Corn Goddess with offerings of first-fruits or by dramatically representing the sowing and the growth of the corn in mythical form, probably dates from an extremely remote antiquity.</p>
				<p>But in order to clear our ideas on this subject it is desirable to ascertain, if possible, the reason for holding the Eleusinian games at intervals of two or four years. The reason for holding a harvest festival and thanksgiving every year is obvious enough; but why hold games only every second or every fourth year? The reason for such limitations is by no means obvious on the face of them, especially if the growth of the crops is deemed dependent on the celebration. In order to find an answer to this question it may be well at the outset to confine our attention to the Great Eleusinian Games, which were celebrated only every fourth year. That these were the principal games appears not only from their name, but from the testimony of Aristotle, or at least of the author of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Constitution of Athens</span></span>, who notices only the quadriennial or, as in accordance with Greek idiom he calls it, the penteteric celebration of the games.<a href="#note_275" id="noteref_275" name="noteref_275"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">275</span></span></a> Now the custom of holding games at intervals of four years was very common in Greece; to take only a few conspicuous examples the Olympic games at Olympia, the Pythian games at Delphi, the Panathenaic games at Athens, and the Eleutherian games at Plataea<a href="#note_276" id="noteref_276" name="noteref_276"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">276</span></span></a> were all celebrated at quadriennial or, as the Greeks called them, penteteric periods; and at a later time when Augustus instituted, or rather renewed on a more splendid scale, the games at Actium to commemorate his great victory, he followed a well-established Greek precedent by ordaining that they should be quadriennial.<a href="#note_277" id="noteref_277" name="noteref_277"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">277</span></span></a> Still later the emperor Hadrian instituted quadriennial games at Mantinea in honour of his dead favourite Antinous.<a href="#note_278" id="noteref_278" name="noteref_278"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">278</span></span></a> But in regard to the two greatest of all the Greek games, the Olympian and the Pythian, I have shewn reasons for thinking that they were originally celebrated at intervals of eight instead of four years; certainly this is attested for the Pythian games,<a href="#note_279" id="noteref_279" name="noteref_279"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">279</span></span></a> and the mode of calculating the Olympiads by alternate periods of fifty and forty-nine lunar months,<a href="#note_280" id="noteref_280" name="noteref_280"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">280</span></span></a> which added together make up eight solar years, seems to prove that the Olympic cycle of four years was really based on a cycle of eight years, from which it is natural to infer that in the beginning the Olympic, like the Pythian, games may have been octennial instead of quadriennial.<a href="#note_281" id="noteref_281" name="noteref_281"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">281</span></span></a> Now we know from the testimony of the ancients themselves that the Greeks instituted the eight-years' cycle for the purpose of harmonising solar and lunar time.<a href="#note_282" id="noteref_282" name="noteref_282"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">282</span></span></a> They regulated their calendar primarily by observation of the moon rather than of the sun; their months were lunar, and their ordinary year consisted of twelve lunar months. But the solar year of three hundred and sixty-five and a quarter days exceeds the lunar year of twelve lunar months or three hundred and fifty-four days by eleven and a quarter days, so that in eight solar years the excess amounts to ninety days or roughly three lunar months. Accordingly the Greeks equated eight solar years to eight lunar years of twelve months each by intercalating three lunar months of thirty days each in the octennial cycle; they intercalated one lunar month in the third year of the cycle, a second lunar month in the fifth year, and a third lunar month in the eighth year.<a href="#note_283" id="noteref_283" name="noteref_283"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">283</span></span></a> In this way they, so to say, made the sun and moon keep time together by reckoning ninety-nine lunar months as equivalent to eight solar years; so that if, for example, the full moon coincided with the summer solstice in one year, it coincided with it again after the revolution of the eight years' cycle, but not before. The equation was indeed not quite exact, and in order to render it so the Greeks afterwards found themselves obliged, first, to intercalate three days every sixteen years, and, next, to omit one intercalary month in every period of one hundred and sixty years.<a href="#note_284" id="noteref_284" name="noteref_284"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">284</span></span></a> But these corrections were doubtless refinements of a later age; they may have been due to the astronomer Eudoxus of Cnidus, or to Cleostratus of Tenedos, who were variously, but incorrectly, supposed to have instituted the octennial cycle.<a href="#note_285" id="noteref_285" name="noteref_285"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">285</span></span></a> There are strong grounds for holding that in its simplest form the octennial cycle of ninety-nine lunar months dates from an extremely remote antiquity in Greece; that it was in fact, as a well-informed Greek writer tell us,<a href="#note_286" id="noteref_286" name="noteref_286"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">286</span></span></a> the first systematic attempt to bring solar and the lunar time into harmony. Indeed, if the Olympiads were calculated, as they appear to have been, on the eight years' cycle, this of itself suffices to place the origin of the cycle not later than 776 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, the year with which the reckoning by Olympiads begins. And when we bear in mind the very remote period from which, judged by the wonderful remains of Mycenae, Tiryns, Cnossus and other cities, civilisation in Greek lands appears to date, it seems reasonable to suppose that the octennial cycle, based as it was on very simple observations, for which nothing but good eyes and almost no astronomical knowledge was necessary,<a href="#note_287" id="noteref_287" name="noteref_287"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">287</span></span></a> may have been handed down among the inhabitants of these countries from ages that preceded by many centuries, possibly by thousands of years, the great period of Greek literature and art. The supposition is confirmed by the traces which the octennial cycle has left of itself in certain ancient Greek customs and superstitions, particularly by the evidence which points to the conclusion that at two of the oldest seats of monarchy in Greece, namely Cnossus and Sparta, the king's tenure of office was formerly limited to eight years.<a href="#note_288" id="noteref_288" name="noteref_288"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">288</span></span></a></p>
				<p>We are informed, and may readily believe, that the motive which led the Greeks to adopt the eight years' cycle was religious rather than practical or scientific: their aim was not so much to ensure the punctual despatch of business or to solve an abstract problem in astronomy, as to ascertain the exact days on which they ought to sacrifice to the gods. For the Greeks regularly employed lunar months in their reckonings,<a href="#note_289" id="noteref_289" name="noteref_289"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">289</span></span></a> and accordingly if they had dated their religious festivals simply by the number of the month and the day of the month, the excess of eleven and a quarter days of the solar over the lunar year would have had the effect of causing the festivals gradually to revolve throughout the whole circle of the seasons, so that in time ceremonies which properly belonged to winter would come to be held in summer, and on the contrary ceremonies which were only appropriate to summer would come to be held in winter. To avoid this anomaly, and to ensure that festivals dated by lunar months should fall at fixed or nearly fixed points in the solar year, the Greeks adopted the octennial cycle by the simple expedient of intercalating three lunar months in every period of eight years. In doing so they acted, as one of their writers justly pointed out, on a principle precisely the reverse of that followed by the ancient Egyptians, who deliberately regulated their religious festivals by a purely lunar calendar for the purpose of allowing them gradually to revolve throughout the whole circle of the seasons.<a href="#note_290" id="noteref_290" name="noteref_290"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">290</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Thus at an early stage of culture the regulation of the calendar is largely an affair of religion: it is a means of maintaining the established relations between gods and men on a satisfactory footing; and in public opinion the great evil of a disordered calendar is not so much that it disturbs and disarranges the ordinary course of business and the various transactions of civil life, as that it endangers the welfare or even the existence both of individuals and of the community by interrupting their normal intercourse with those divine powers on whose favour men believe themselves to be absolutely dependent. Hence in states which take this view of the deep religious import of the calendar its superintendence is naturally entrusted to priests rather than to astronomers, because the science of astronomy is regarded merely as ancillary to the deeper mysteries of theology. For example, at Rome the method of determining the months and regulating the festivals was a secret which the pontiffs for ages jealously guarded from the profane vulgar; and in consequence of their ignorance and incapacity the calendar fell into confusion and the festivals were celebrated out of their natural seasons, until the greatest of all the Roman pontiffs, Julius Caesar, remedied the confusion and placed the calendar of the civilised world on the firm foundation on which, with little change, it stands to this day.<a href="#note_291" id="noteref_291" name="noteref_291"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">291</span></span></a></p>
				<p>On the whole, then, it appears probable that the octennial cycle, based on considerations of religion and on elementary observations of the two great luminaries, dated from a very remote period among the ancient Greeks; if they did not bring it with them when they migrated southwards from the oakwoods and beechwoods of Central Europe, they may well have taken it over from their civilised predecessors of different blood and different language whom they found leading a settled agricultural life on the lands about the Aegean Sea. Now we have seen reasons to hold that the two most famous of the great Greek games, the Pythian and the Olympian, were both based on the ancient cycle of eight years, and that the quadriennial period at which they were regularly celebrated in historical times was arrived at by a subdivision of the older octennial cycle. It is hardly rash, therefore, to conjecture that the quadriennial period in general, regarded as the normal period for the celebration of great games and festivals, was originally founded on elementary religious and astronomical considerations of the same kind, that is, on a somewhat crude attempt to harmonise the discrepancies of solar and lunar time and thereby to ensure the continued favour of the gods. It is, indeed, certain or probable that some of these quadriennial festivals were celebrated in honour of the dead;<a href="#note_292" id="noteref_292" name="noteref_292"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">292</span></span></a> but there seems to be nothing in the beliefs or customs of the ancient Greeks concerning the dead which would suggest a quadriennial period as an appropriate one for propitiating the ghosts of the departed. At first sight it is different with the octennial period; for according to Pindar, the souls of the dead who had been purged of their guilt by an abode of eight years in the nether world were born again on earth in the ninth year as glorious kings, athletes, and sages.<a href="#note_293" id="noteref_293" name="noteref_293"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">293</span></span></a> Now if this belief in the reincarnation of the dead after eight years were primitive, it might certainly furnish an excellent reason for honouring the ghosts of great men at their graves every eight years in order to facilitate their rebirth into the world. Yet the period of eight years thus rigidly applied to the life of disembodied spirits appears too arbitrary and conventional to be really primitive, and we may suspect that in this application it was nothing but an inference drawn from the old octennial cycle, which had been instituted for the purpose of reconciling solar and lunar time. If that was so, it will follow that the quadriennial period of funeral games was, like the similar period of other religious festivals, obtained through the bisection of the octennial cycle, and hence that it was ultimately derived from astronomical considerations rather than from any beliefs touching a quadriennial revolution in the state of the dead. Yet in historical times it may well have happened that these considerations were forgotten, and that games and festivals were instituted at quadriennial intervals, for example at Plataea<a href="#note_294" id="noteref_294" name="noteref_294"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">294</span></span></a> in honour of the slain, at Actium to commemorate the great victory, and at Mantinea in honour of Antinous,<a href="#note_295" id="noteref_295" name="noteref_295"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">295</span></span></a> without any conscious reference to the sun and moon, and merely because that period had from time immemorial been regarded as the proper and normal one for the celebration of certain solemn religious rites.</p>
				<p>If we enquire why the Greeks so often bisected the old octennial period into two quadriennial periods for purposes of religion, the answer can only be conjectural, for no positive information appears to be given us on the subject by ancient writers. Perhaps they thought that eight years was too long a time to elapse between the solemn services, and that it was desirable to propitiate the deities at shorter intervals. But it is possible that political as well as religious motives may have operated to produce the change. We have seen reason to think that at two of the oldest seats of monarchy in Greece, namely Cnossus and Sparta, kings formerly held office for periods of eight years only, after which their sovereignty either terminated or had to be formally renewed. Now with the gradual growth of that democratic sentiment, which ultimately dominated Greek political life, men would become more and more jealous of the kingly power and would seek to restrict it within narrower limits, and one of the most obvious means of doing so was to shorten the king's tenure of office. We know that this was done at Athens, where the dynasty of the Medontids was reduced from the rank of monarchs for life to that of magistrates holding office for ten years only.<a href="#note_296" id="noteref_296" name="noteref_296"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">296</span></span></a> It is possible that elsewhere the king's reign was cut down from eight years to four years; and if I am right in my explanation of the origin of the Olympic games this political revolution actually took place at Olympia, where the victors in the chariot-race would seem at first to have personated the Sun-god and perhaps held office in the capacity of divine kings during the intervals between successive celebrations of the games.<a href="#note_297" id="noteref_297" name="noteref_297"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">297</span></span></a> If at Olympia and elsewhere the games were of old primarily contests in which the king had personally to take part for the purpose of attesting his bodily vigour and therefore his capacity for office, the repetition of the test at intervals of four instead of eight years might be regarded as furnishing a better guarantee of the maintenance of the king's efficiency and thereby of the general welfare, which in primitive society is often supposed to be sympathetically bound up with the health and strength of the king.</p>
				<p>But while many of the great Greek games were celebrated at intervals of four years, others, such as the Nemean and the Isthmian, were celebrated at intervals of two years only; and just as the quadriennial period seems to have been arrived at through a bisection of the octennial period, so we may surmise that the biennial period was produced by a bisection of the quadriennial period. This was the view which the admirable modern chronologer L. Ideler took of the origin of the quadriennial and biennial festivals respectively,<a href="#note_298" id="noteref_298" name="noteref_298"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">298</span></span></a> and it appears far more probable than the contrary opinion of the ancient chronologer Censorinus, that the quadriennial period was reached by doubling the biennial, and the octennial period by doubling the quadriennial.<a href="#note_299" id="noteref_299" name="noteref_299"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">299</span></span></a> The theory of Censorinus was that the Greeks started with a biennial cycle of twelve and thirteen lunar months alternately in successive years for the purpose of harmonising solar and lunar time.<a href="#note_300" id="noteref_300" name="noteref_300"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">300</span></span></a> But as the cycle so produced exceeds the true solar time by seven and a half days,<a href="#note_301" id="noteref_301" name="noteref_301"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">301</span></span></a> the discrepancy which it leaves between the two great celestial clocks, the sun and moon, was too glaring to escape the observation even of simple farmers, who would soon have been painfully sensible that the times were out of joint, if they had attempted to regulate the various operations of the agricultural year by reference to so very inaccurate an almanac. It is unlikely, therefore, that the Greeks ever made much use of a biennial cycle of this sort.</p>
				<p>Now to apply these conclusions to the Eleusinian games, which furnished the starting-point for the preceding discussion. Whatever the origin and meaning of these games may have been, we may surmise that the quadriennial and biennial periods at which they were held were originally derived from astronomical considerations, and that they had nothing to do directly either with the agricultural cycle, which is annual, nor with the worship of the dead, which can scarcely be said to have any cycle at all, unless indeed it be an annual one. In other words, neither the needs of husbandry nor the superstitions relating to ghosts furnish any natural explanation of the quadriennial and biennial periods of the Eleusinian games, and to discover such an explanation we are obliged to fall back on astronomy or, to be more exact, on that blend of astronomy with religion which appears to be mainly responsible for such Greek festivals as exceed a year in their period. To admit this is not to decide the question whether the Eleusinian games were agricultural or funereal in character; but it is implicitly to acknowledge that the games were of later origin than the annual ceremonies, including the Great Mysteries, which were designed to propitiate the deities of the corn for the very simple and practical purpose of ensuring good crops within the year. For it cannot but be that men observed and laid their account with the annual changes of the seasons, especially as manifested by the growth and maturity of the crops, long before they attempted to reconcile the discrepancies of solar and lunar time by a series of observations extending over several years.</p>
				<p>On the whole, then, if, ignoring theories, we adhere to the evidence of the ancients themselves in regard to the rites of Eleusis, including under that general term the Great Mysteries, the games, the Festival before Ploughing (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="el" xml:lang="el"><span style="font-style: italic">proerosia</span></span>), the Festival of the Threshing-floor, the Green Festival, the Festival of the Cornstalks, and the offerings of first-fruits, we shall probably incline to agree with the most learned of ancient antiquaries, the Roman Varro, who, to quote Augustine's report of his opinion, <span class="tei tei-q">“interpreted the whole of the Eleusinian mysteries as relating to the corn which Ceres (Demeter) had discovered, and to Proserpine (Persephone), whom Pluto had carried off from her. And Proserpine herself, he said, signifies the fecundity of the seeds, the failure of which at a certain time had caused the earth to mourn for barrenness, and therefore had given rise to the opinion that the daughter of Ceres, that is, fecundity itself, had been ravished by Pluto and detained in the nether world; and when the dearth had been publicly mourned and fecundity had returned once more, there was gladness at the return of Proserpine and solemn rites were instituted accordingly. After that he says,”</span> continues Augustine, reporting Varro, <span class="tei tei-q">“that many things were taught in her mysteries which had no reference but to the discovery of the corn.”</span><a href="#note_302" id="noteref_302" name="noteref_302"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">302</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Thus far I have for the most part assumed an identity of nature between Demeter and Persephone, the divine mother and daughter personifying the corn in its double aspect of the seed-corn of last year and the ripe ears of this, and I pointed out that this view of the substantial unity of mother and daughter is borne out by their portraits in Greek art, which are often so alike as to be indistinguishable. Such a close resemblance between the artistic types of Demeter and Persephone militates decidedly against the view that the two goddesses are mythical embodiments of two things so different and so easily distinguishable from each other as the earth and the vegetation which springs from it. Had Greek artists accepted that view of Demeter and Persephone, they could surely have devised types of them which would have brought out the deep distinction between the goddesses. That they were capable of doing so is proved by the simple fact that they regularly represented the Earth Goddess by a type which differed widely both from that of Demeter and from that of Persephone.<a href="#note_303" id="noteref_303" name="noteref_303"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">303</span></span></a> Not only so, but they sometimes set the two types of the Earth Goddess and the Corn Goddess (Demeter) side by side as if on purpose to demonstrate their difference. Thus at Patrae there was a sanctuary of Demeter, in which she and Persephone were portrayed standing, while Earth was represented by a seated image;<a href="#note_304" id="noteref_304" name="noteref_304"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">304</span></span></a> and on a vase-painting the Earth Goddess is seen appropriately emerging from the ground with a horn of plenty and an infant in her uplifted arms, while Demeter and Persephone, scarcely distinguishable from each other, stand at full height behind her, looking down at her half-buried figure, and Triptolemus in his wheeled car sits directly above her.<a href="#note_305" id="noteref_305" name="noteref_305"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">305</span></span></a> In this instructive picture, accordingly, we see grouped together the principal personages in the myth of the corn: the Earth Goddess, the two Goddesses of the old and the new corn, and the hero who is said to have been sent forth by the Corn Goddess to sow the seed broadcast over the earth. Such representations seem to prove that the artists clearly distinguished Demeter from the Earth Goddess.<a href="#note_306" id="noteref_306" name="noteref_306"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">306</span></span></a> And if Demeter did not personify the earth, can there be any reasonable doubt that, like her daughter, she personified the corn which was so commonly called by her name from the time of Homer downwards? The essential identity of mother and daughter is suggested, not only by the close resemblance of their artistic types, but also by the official title of <span class="tei tei-q">“the Two Goddesses”</span> which was regularly applied to them in the great sanctuary at Eleusis without any specification of their individual attributes and titles,<a href="#note_307" id="noteref_307" name="noteref_307"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">307</span></span></a> as if their separate individualities had almost merged in a single divine substance.<a href="#note_308" id="noteref_308" name="noteref_308"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">308</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Surveying the evidence as a whole, we may say that from the myth of Demeter and Persephone, from their ritual, from their representations in art, from the titles which they bore, from the offerings of first-fruits which were presented to them, and from the names applied to the cereals, we are fairly entitled to conclude that in the mind of the ordinary Greek the two goddesses were essentially personifications of the corn, and that in this germ the whole efflorescence of their religion finds implicitly its explanation. But to maintain this is not to deny that in the long course of religious evolution high moral and spiritual conceptions were grafted on this simple original stock and blossomed out into fairer flowers than the bloom of the barley and the wheat. Above all, the thought of the seed buried in the earth in order to spring up to new and higher life readily suggested a comparison with human destiny, and strengthened the hope that for man too the grave may be but the beginning of a better and happier existence in some brighter world unknown. This simple and natural reflection seems perfectly sufficient to explain the association of the Corn Goddess at Eleusis with the mystery of death and the hope of a blissful immortality. For that the ancients regarded initiation in the Eleusinian mysteries as a key to unlock the gates of Paradise appears to be proved by the allusions which well-informed writers among them drop to the happiness in store for the initiated hereafter.<a href="#note_309" id="noteref_309" name="noteref_309"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">309</span></span></a> No doubt it is easy for us to discern the flimsiness of the logical foundation on which such high hopes were built.<a href="#note_310" id="noteref_310" name="noteref_310"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">310</span></span></a> But drowning men clutch at straws, and we need not wonder that the Greeks, like ourselves, with death before them and a great love of life in their hearts, should not have stopped to weigh with too nice a hand the arguments that told for and against the prospect of human immortality. The reasoning that satisfied Saint Paul<a href="#note_311" id="noteref_311" name="noteref_311"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">311</span></span></a> and has brought comfort to untold thousands of sorrowing Christians, standing by the deathbed or the open grave of their loved ones, was good enough to pass muster with ancient pagans, when they too bowed their heads under the burden of grief, and, with the taper of life burning low in the socket, looked forward into the darkness of the unknown. Therefore we do no indignity to the myth of Demeter and Persephone—one of the few myths in which the sunshine and clarity of the Greek genius are crossed by the shadow and mystery of death—when we trace its origin to some of the most familiar, yet eternally affecting aspects of nature, to the melancholy gloom and decay of autumn and to the freshness, the brightness, and the verdure of spring.</p>
			</div>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
