<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc35" name="toc35"/>
				<a id="pdf36" name="pdf36"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter VIII. The Killing Of The Tree-Spirit.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc37" name="toc37"/>
					<a id="pdf38" name="pdf38"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. The Whitsuntide Mummers.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The single combat of the King of the Wood at Nemi was probably a mitigation of an older custom of putting him to death at the end of a fixed period.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>It remains to ask what light the custom of killing the divine king or priest sheds upon the special subject of our enquiry. In the first part of this work we saw reason to suppose that the King of the Wood at Nemi was regarded as an incarnation of a tree-spirit or of the spirit of vegetation, and that as such he would be endowed, in the belief of his worshippers, with a magical power of making the trees to bear fruit, the crops to grow, and so on.<a href="#note_562" id="noteref_562" name="noteref_562"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">562</span></span></a> His life must therefore have been held very precious by his worshippers, and was probably hedged in by a system of elaborate precautions or taboos like those by which, in so many places, the life of the man-god has been guarded against the malignant influence of demons and sorcerers. But we have seen that the very value attached to the life of the man-god necessitates his violent death as the only means of preserving it from the inevitable decay of age. The same reasoning would apply to the King of the Wood; he, too, had to be killed in order that the divine spirit, incarnate in him, might be transferred in its integrity to his successor. The rule that he held office till a stronger should slay him might be supposed to secure both the preservation of his divine life in full vigour and its transference to a suitable successor as soon as that vigour began to be impaired. For so long as he could maintain his position by the strong hand, it might be inferred that his natural force was not abated; whereas his <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page206">[pg 206]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg206" name="Pg206"/> defeat and death at the hands of another proved that his strength was beginning to fail and that it was time his divine life should be lodged in a less dilapidated tabernacle. This explanation of the rule that the King of the Wood had to be slain by his successor at least renders that rule perfectly intelligible. It is strongly supported by the theory and practice of the Shilluk, who put their divine king to death at the first signs of failing health, lest his decrepitude should entail a corresponding failure of vital energy on the corn, the cattle, and men.<a href="#note_563" id="noteref_563" name="noteref_563"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">563</span></span></a> Moreover, it is countenanced by the analogy of the Chitomé, upon whose life the existence of the world was supposed to hang, and who was therefore slain by his successor as soon as he shewed signs of breaking up. Again, the terms on which in later times the King of Calicut held office are identical with those attached to the office of King of the Wood, except that whereas the former might be assailed by a candidate at any time, the King of Calicut might only be attacked once every twelve years. But as the leave granted to the King of Calicut to reign so long as he could defend himself against all comers was a mitigation of the old rule which set a fixed term to his life,<a href="#note_564" id="noteref_564" name="noteref_564"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">564</span></span></a> so we may conjecture that the similar permission granted to the King of the Wood was a mitigation of an older custom of putting him to death at the end of a definite period. In both cases the new rule gave to the god-man at least a chance for his life, which under the old rule was denied him; and people probably reconciled themselves to the change by reflecting that so long as the god-man could maintain himself by the sword against all assaults, there was no reason to apprehend that the fatal decay had set in.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Custom of killing the human representatives of the tree-spirit.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The conjecture that the King of the Wood was formerly put to death at the expiry of a fixed term, without being allowed a chance for his life, will be confirmed if evidence can be adduced of a custom of periodically killing his counterparts, the human representatives of the tree-spirit, in Northern Europe. Now in point of fact such a custom has left unmistakable traces of itself in the rural festivals of the peasantry. To take examples.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Bavarian customs of beheading the representatives of the tree-spirit at Whitsuntide.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>At Niederpöring, in Lower Bavaria, the Whitsuntide <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page207">[pg 207]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg207" name="Pg207"/> representative of the tree-spirit—the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pfingstl</span></span> as he was called—was clad from top to toe in leaves and flowers. On his head he wore a high pointed cap, the ends of which rested on his shoulders, only two holes being left in it for his eyes. The cap was covered with water-flowers and surmounted with a nosegay of peonies. The sleeves of his coat were also made of water-plants, and the rest of his body was enveloped in alder and hazel leaves. On each side of him marched a boy holding up one of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pfingstl's</span></span> arms. These two boys carried drawn swords, and so did most of the others who formed the procession. They stopped at every house where they hoped to receive a present; and the people, in hiding, soused the leaf-clad boy with water. All rejoiced when he was well drenched. Finally he waded into the brook up to his middle; whereupon one of the boys, standing on the bridge, pretended to cut off his head.<a href="#note_565" id="noteref_565" name="noteref_565"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">565</span></span></a> At Wurmlingen, in Swabia, a score of young fellows dress themselves on Whit-Monday in white shirts and white trousers, with red scarves round their waists and swords hanging from the scarves. They ride on horseback into the wood, led by two trumpeters blowing their trumpets. In the wood they cut down leafy oak branches, in which they envelop from head to foot him who was the last of their number to ride out of the village. His legs, however, are encased separately, so that he may be able to mount <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page208">[pg 208]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg208" name="Pg208"/> his horse again. Further, they give him a long artificial neck, with an artificial head and a false face on the top of it. Then a May-tree is cut, generally an aspen or beech about ten feet high; and being decked with coloured handkerchiefs and ribbons it is entrusted to a special <span class="tei tei-q">“May-bearer.”</span> The cavalcade then returns with music and song to the village. Amongst the personages who figure in the procession are a Moorish king with a sooty face and a crown on his head, a Dr. Iron-Beard, a corporal, and an executioner. They halt on the village green, and each of the characters makes a speech in rhyme. The executioner announces that the leaf-clad man has been condemned to death, and cuts off his false head. Then the riders race to the May-tree, which has been set up a little way off. The first man who succeeds in wrenching it from the ground as he gallops past keeps it with all its decorations. The ceremony is observed every second or third year.<a href="#note_566" id="noteref_566" name="noteref_566"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">566</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Killing the Wild Man in Saxony and Bohemia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Saxony and Thüringen there is a Whitsuntide ceremony called <span class="tei tei-q">“chasing the Wild Man out of the bush,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“fetching the Wild Man out of the Wood.”</span> A young fellow is enveloped in leaves or moss and called the Wild Man. He hides in the wood and the other lads of the village go out to seek him. They find him, lead him captive out of the wood, and fire at him with blank muskets. He falls like dead to the ground, but a lad dressed as a doctor bleeds him, and he comes to life again. At this they rejoice, and, binding him fast on a waggon, take him to the village, where they tell all the people how they have caught the Wild Man. At every house they receive a gift.<a href="#note_567" id="noteref_567" name="noteref_567"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">567</span></span></a> In the Erzgebirge the following custom was annually observed at Shrovetide about the beginning of the seventeenth century. Two men disguised as Wild Men, the one in brushwood and moss, the other in straw, were led about the streets, and at last taken to the market-place, where they were chased up and down, shot and stabbed. Before falling they reeled about with strange gestures and spirted blood on the people <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page209">[pg 209]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg209" name="Pg209"/> from bladders which they carried. When they were down the huntsmen placed them on boards and carried them to the ale-house, the miners marching beside them and winding blasts on their mining tools as if they had taken a noble head of game.<a href="#note_568" id="noteref_568" name="noteref_568"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">568</span></span></a> A very similar Shrovetide custom is still observed near Schluckenau in Bohemia. A man dressed up as a Wild Man is chased through several streets till he comes to a narrow lane across which a cord is stretched. He stumbles over the cord and, falling to the ground, is overtaken and caught by his pursuers. The executioner runs up and stabs with his sword a bladder filled with blood which the Wild Man wears round his body; so the Wild Man dies, while a stream of blood reddens the ground. Next day a straw-man, made up to look like the Wild Man, is placed on a litter, and, accompanied by a great crowd, is taken to a pool into which it is thrown by the executioner. The ceremony is called <span class="tei tei-q">“burying the Carnival.”</span><a href="#note_569" id="noteref_569" name="noteref_569"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">569</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Beheading the King on Whit-Monday in Bohemia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Semic (Bohemia) the custom of beheading the King is observed on Whit-Monday. A troop of young people disguise themselves; each is girt with a girdle of bark and carries a wooden sword and a trumpet of willow-bark. The King wears a robe of tree-bark adorned with flowers, on his head is a crown of bark decked with flowers and branches, his feet are wound about with ferns, a mask hides his face, and for a sceptre he has a hawthorn switch in his hand. A lad leads him through the village by a rope fastened to his foot, while the rest dance about, blow their trumpets, and whistle. In every farmhouse the King is chased round the room, and one of the troop, amid much noise and outcry strikes with his sword a blow on the King's robe of bark till it rings again. Then a gratuity is demanded.<a href="#note_570" id="noteref_570" name="noteref_570"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">570</span></span></a> The ceremony of decapitation, which is here somewhat slurred over, is carried out with a greater semblance of reality in other parts of Bohemia. Thus in some villages of the Königgrätz district on Whit-Monday the girls assemble under one lime-tree and the young men under another, all dressed <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page210">[pg 210]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg210" name="Pg210"/> in their best and tricked out with ribbons. The young men twine a garland for the Queen, and the girls another for the King. When they have chosen the King and Queen they all go in procession, two and two, to the ale-house, from the balcony of which the crier proclaims the names of the King and Queen. Both are then invested with the insignia of their office and are crowned with the garlands, while the music plays up. Then some one gets on a bench and accuses the King of various offences, such as ill-treating the cattle. The King appeals to witnesses and a trial ensues, at the close of which the judge, who carries a white wand as his badge of office, pronounces a verdict of <span class="tei tei-q">“Guilty”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“Not guilty.”</span> If the verdict is <span class="tei tei-q">“Guilty,”</span> the judge breaks his wand, the King kneels on a white cloth, all heads are bared, and a soldier sets three or four hats, one above the other, on his Majesty's head. The judge then pronounces the word <span class="tei tei-q">“Guilty”</span> thrice in a loud voice, and orders the crier to behead the King. The crier obeys by striking off the King's hats with his wooden sword.<a href="#note_571" id="noteref_571" name="noteref_571"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">571</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Beheading the King on Whit-Monday in Bohemia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>But perhaps, for our purpose, the most instructive of these mimic executions is the following Bohemian one, which has been in part described already.<a href="#note_572" id="noteref_572" name="noteref_572"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">572</span></span></a> In some places of the Pilsen district (Bohemia) on Whit-Monday the King is dressed in bark, ornamented with flowers and ribbons; he wears a crown of gilt paper and rides a horse, which is also decked with flowers. Attended by a judge, an executioner, and other characters, and followed by a train of soldiers, all mounted, he rides to the village square, where a hut or arbour of green boughs has been erected under the May-trees, which are firs, freshly cut, peeled to the top, and dressed with flowers and ribbons. After the dames and maidens of the village have been criticised and a frog beheaded, in the way already described, the cavalcade rides to a place previously determined upon, in a straight, broad street. Here they draw up in two lines and the King takes to flight. He is given a short start and rides off at full speed, pursued by the whole troop. If they fail to catch him he remains King for another year, and his companions <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page211">[pg 211]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg211" name="Pg211"/> must pay his score at the ale-house in the evening. But if they overtake and catch him he is scourged with hazel rods or beaten with the wooden swords and compelled to dismount. Then the executioner asks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Shall I behead this King?”</span> The answer is given, <span class="tei tei-q">“Behead him”</span>; the executioner brandishes his axe, and with the words, <span class="tei tei-q">“One, two, three, let the King headless be!”</span> he strikes off the King's crown. Amid the loud cries of the bystanders the King sinks to the ground; then he is laid on a bier and carried to the nearest farmhouse.<a href="#note_573" id="noteref_573" name="noteref_573"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">573</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The leaf-clad mummers in these customs represent the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In most of the personages who are thus slain in mimicry it is impossible not to recognise representatives of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation, as he is supposed to manifest himself in spring. The bark, leaves, and flowers in which the actors are dressed, and the season of the year at which they appear, shew that they belong to the same class as the Grass King, King of the May, Jack-in-the-Green, and other representatives of the vernal spirit of vegetation which we examined in the first part of this work.<a href="#note_574" id="noteref_574" name="noteref_574"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">574</span></span></a> As if to remove any possible doubt on this head, we find that in two cases<a href="#note_575" id="noteref_575" name="noteref_575"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">575</span></span></a> these slain men are brought into direct connexion with May-trees, which are the impersonal, as the May King, Grass King, and so forth, are the personal representatives of the tree-spirit. The drenching of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pfingstl</span></span> with water and his wading up to the middle into the brook are, therefore, no doubt rain-charms like those which have been already described.<a href="#note_576" id="noteref_576" name="noteref_576"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">576</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The tree-spirit is killed in order to prevent its decay and ensure its revival in a vigorous successor.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>But if these personages represent, as they certainly do, the spirit of vegetation in spring, the question arises, Why kill them? What is the object of slaying the spirit of vegetation at any time and above all in spring, when his services are most wanted? The only probable answer to this question seems to be given in the explanation already proposed of the custom of killing the divine king or priest. The divine life, incarnate in a material and mortal body, is liable to be tainted and corrupted by the weakness of the frail <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page212">[pg 212]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg212" name="Pg212"/> medium in which it is for a time enshrined; and if it is to be saved from the increasing enfeeblement which it must necessarily share with its human incarnation as he advances in years, it must be detached from him before, or at least as soon as, he exhibits signs of decay, in order to be transferred to a vigorous successor. This is done by killing the old representative of the god and conveying the divine spirit from him to a new incarnation. The killing of the god, that is, of his human incarnation, is therefore merely a necessary step to his revival or resurrection in a better form. Far from being an extinction of the divine spirit, it is only the beginning of a purer and stronger manifestation of it. If this explanation holds good of the custom of killing divine kings and priests in general, it is still more obviously applicable to the custom of annually killing the representative of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation in spring. For the decay of plant life in winter is readily interpreted by primitive man as an enfeeblement of the spirit of vegetation; the spirit has, he thinks, grown old and weak and must therefore be renovated by being slain and brought to life in a younger and fresher form. Thus the killing of the representative of the tree-spirit in spring is regarded as a means to promote and quicken the growth of vegetation. For the killing of the tree-spirit is associated always (we must suppose) implicitly, and sometimes explicitly also, with a revival or resurrection of him in a more youthful and vigorous form. So in the Saxon and Thüringen custom, after the Wild Man has been shot he is brought to life again by a doctor;<a href="#note_577" id="noteref_577" name="noteref_577"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">577</span></span></a> and in the Wurmlingen ceremony there figures a Dr. Iron-Beard, who probably once played a similar part; certainly in another spring ceremony, which will be described presently, Dr. Iron-Beard pretends to restore a dead man to life. But of this revival or resurrection of the god we shall have more to say anon.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Resemblances between these North European customs and the rites of Nemi.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The points of similarity between these North European personages and the subject of our enquiry—the King of the Wood or priest of Nemi—are sufficiently striking. In these northern maskers we see kings, whose dress of bark and leaves, along with the hut of green boughs and the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page213">[pg 213]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg213" name="Pg213"/> fir-trees under which they hold their court, proclaim them unmistakably as, like their Italian counterpart, Kings of the Wood. Like him they die a violent death, but like him they may escape from it for a time by their bodily strength and agility; for in several of these northern customs the flight and pursuit of the king is a prominent part of the ceremony, and in one case at least if the king can outrun his pursuers he retains his life and his office for another year. In this last case the king in fact holds office on condition of running for his life once a year, just as the King of Calicut in later times held office on condition of defending his life against all comers once every twelve years, and just as the priest of Nemi held office on condition of defending himself against any assault at any time. In every one of these instances the life of the god-man is prolonged on condition of his shewing, in a severe physical contest of fight or flight, that his bodily strength is not decayed, and that, therefore, the violent death, which sooner or later is inevitable, may for the present be postponed. With regard to flight it is noticeable that flight figured conspicuously both in the legend and in the practice of the King of the Wood. He had to be a runaway slave in memory of the flight of Orestes, the traditional founder of the worship; hence the Kings of the Wood are described by an ancient writer as <span class="tei tei-q">“both strong of hand and fleet of foot.”</span><a href="#note_578" id="noteref_578" name="noteref_578"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">578</span></span></a> Perhaps if we knew the ritual of the Arician grove fully we might find that the king was allowed a chance for his life by flight, like his Bohemian brother. I have already conjectured that the annual flight of the priestly king at Rome (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">regifugium</span></span>) was at first a flight of the same kind; in other words, that he was originally one of those divine kings who are either put to death after a fixed period or allowed to prove by the strong hand or the fleet foot that their divinity is vigorous and unimpaired.<a href="#note_579" id="noteref_579" name="noteref_579"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">579</span></span></a> One more point of resemblance may be noted between the Italian King of the Wood and his northern counterparts. In Saxony and Thüringen the representative of the tree-spirit, after being killed, is brought to life again by a doctor. This is exactly what legend affirmed to have <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page214">[pg 214]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg214" name="Pg214"/> happened to the first King of the Wood at Nemi, Hippolytus or Virbius, who after he had been killed by his horses was restored to life by the physician Aesculapius.<a href="#note_580" id="noteref_580" name="noteref_580"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">580</span></span></a> Such a legend tallies well with the theory that the slaying of the King of the Wood was only a step to his revival or resurrection in his successor.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc39" name="toc39"/>
					<a id="pdf40" name="pdf40"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. Mock Human Sacrifices.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The mock killing of the leaf-clad mummers is probably a substitute for an old custom of killing them in earnest. Substitution of mock human sacrifices for real ones.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In the preceding discussion it has been assumed that the mock killing of the Wild Man and of the King in North European folk-custom is a modern substitute for an ancient custom of killing them in earnest. Those who best know the tenacity of life possessed by folk-custom and its tendency, with the growth of civilisation, to dwindle from solemn ritual into mere pageant and pastime, will be least likely to question the truth of this assumption. That human sacrifices were commonly offered by the ancestors of the civilised races of North Europe, Celts, Teutons, and Slavs, is certain.<a href="#note_581" id="noteref_581" name="noteref_581"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">581</span></span></a> It is not, therefore, surprising that the modern peasant should do in mimicry what his forefathers did in reality. We know as a matter of fact that in other parts of the world mock human sacrifices have been substituted for real ones. Thus in Minahassa, a district of Celebes, human victims used to be regularly sacrificed at certain festivals, but through Dutch influence the custom was abolished and a sham sacrifice substituted for it. The victim was seated in a chair and all the usual preparations were made for sacrificing him, but at the critical moment, when the chief priest had heaved up his flashing swords (for he wielded two of them) to deal the fatal stroke, his assistants sprang forward, their hands wrapt in cloths, to grasp and arrest the descending blades. The precaution was necessary, for the priest was wound up to such a pitch of excitement that if left alone he might have consummated <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page215">[pg 215]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg215" name="Pg215"/> the sacrifice. Afterwards an effigy, made out of the stem of a banana-tree, was substituted for the human victim; and the blood, which might not be wanting, was supplied by fowls.<a href="#note_582" id="noteref_582" name="noteref_582"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">582</span></span></a> Near the native town of Luba, in western Busoga, a district of central Africa, there is a sacred tree of the species known as <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Parinarium</span></span>. Its glossy white trunk shoots up to a height of a hundred feet before it sends out branches. The tree is surrounded by small fetish huts and curious arcades. Once when the dry season was drawing to an end and the new crops were not yet ripe, the Basoga suffered from hunger. So they came to the sacred tree in canoes, of which the prows were decked with wreaths of yellow acacia blossom and other flowers. Landing on the shore they stripped themselves of their clothing and wrapped ropes made of green creepers and leaves round their arms and necks. At the foot of the tree they danced to an accompaniment of song. Then a little girl, about ten years old, was brought and laid at the base of the tree as if she were to be sacrificed. Every detail of the sacrifice was gone through in mimicry. A slight cut was made in the child's neck, and she was then caught up and thrown into the lake, where a man stood ready to save her from drowning. By native custom the girl on whom this ceremony had been performed was dedicated to a life of perpetual virginity.<a href="#note_583" id="noteref_583" name="noteref_583"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">583</span></span></a> Captain Bourke was informed by an old chief that the Indians of Arizona used to offer human sacrifices at the Feast of Fire when the days are shortest. The victim had his throat cut, his breast opened, and his heart taken out by one of the priests. This custom was abolished by the Mexicans, but for a long time afterwards a modified form of it was secretly observed as follows. The victim, generally a young man, had his throat cut, and blood was allowed to flow freely; but the medicine-men sprinkled <span class="tei tei-q">“medicine”</span> on the gash, which soon healed up, and the man recovered.<a href="#note_584" id="noteref_584" name="noteref_584"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">584</span></span></a> So in the ritual of Artemis at Halae in Attica, a man's <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page216">[pg 216]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg216" name="Pg216"/> throat was cut and the blood allowed to gush out, but he was not killed.<a href="#note_585" id="noteref_585" name="noteref_585"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">585</span></span></a> At the funeral of a chief in Nias slaves are sacrificed; a little of their hair is cut off, and then they are beheaded. The victims are generally purchased for the purpose, and their number is proportioned to the wealth and power of the deceased. But if the number required is excessively great or cannot be procured, some of the chiefs own slaves undergo a sham sacrifice. They are told, and believe, that they are about to be decapitated; their heads are placed on a log and their necks struck with the back of a sword. The fright drives some of them crazy.<a href="#note_586" id="noteref_586" name="noteref_586"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">586</span></span></a> When a Hindoo has killed or ill-treated an ape, a bird of prey of a certain kind, or a cobra capella, in the presence of the worshippers of Vishnu, he must expiate his offence by the pretended sacrifice and resurrection of a human being. An incision is made in the victim's arm, the blood flows, he grows faint, falls, and feigns to die. Afterwards he is brought to life by being sprinkled with blood drawn from the thigh of a worshipper of Vishnu. The crowd of spectators is fully convinced of the reality of this simulated death and resurrection.<a href="#note_587" id="noteref_587" name="noteref_587"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">587</span></span></a> The Malayans, a caste of Southern India, act as devil dancers for the purpose of exorcising demons who have taken possession of people. One of their ceremonies, <span class="tei tei-q">“known as <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ucchav[-e]li</span></span>, has several forms, all of which seem to be either survivals, or at least imitations of human sacrifice. One of these consists of a mock living burial of the principal performer, who is placed in a pit, which is covered with planks, on the top of which a sacrifice is performed, with a fire kindled with jack wood (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Artocarpus integrifolia</span></span>) and a plant called erinna. In another variety, the Malayan cuts his left forearm, and smears his face with the blood thus drawn.”</span><a href="#note_588" id="noteref_588" name="noteref_588"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">588</span></span></a> In Samoa, where every family had its god incarnate in one or more species of animals, any disrespect shewn to the worshipful <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page217">[pg 217]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg217" name="Pg217"/> animal, either by members of the kin or by a stranger in their presence, had to be atoned for by pretending to bake one of the family in a cold oven as a burnt sacrifice to appease the wrath of the offended god. For example, if a stranger staying in a household whose god was incarnate in cuttle-fish were to catch and cook one of these creatures, or if a member of the family had been present where a cuttle-fish was eaten, the family would meet in solemn conclave and choose a man or woman to go and lie down in a cold oven, where he would be covered over with leaves, just as if he were really being baked. While this mock sacrifice was being carried out the family prayed: <span class="tei tei-q">“O bald-headed Cuttle-fish! forgive what has been done, it was all the work of a stranger.”</span> If they had not thus abased themselves before the divine cuttle-fish, he would undoubtedly have come and been the death of somebody by making a cuttle-fish to grow in his inside.<a href="#note_589" id="noteref_589" name="noteref_589"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">589</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Mock human sacrifices carried out in effigy.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Sometimes, as in Minahassa, the pretended sacrifice is carried out, not on a living person, but on an effigy. At the City of the Sun in ancient Egypt three men used to be sacrificed every day, after the priests had stripped and examined them, like calves, to see whether they were without blemish and fit for the altar. But King Amasis ordered waxen images to be substituted for the human victims.<a href="#note_590" id="noteref_590" name="noteref_590"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">590</span></span></a> An Indian law-book, the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calica Puran</span></span>, prescribes that when the sacrifice of lions, tigers, or human beings is required, an image of a lion, tiger, or man shall be made with butter, paste, or barley meal, and sacrificed instead.<a href="#note_591" id="noteref_591" name="noteref_591"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">591</span></span></a> Some of the Gonds of India formerly offered human sacrifices; they now sacrifice straw-men, which are found to answer the purpose just as well.<a href="#note_592" id="noteref_592" name="noteref_592"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">592</span></span></a> Colonel Dalton was told that in some of their villages the Bhagats <span class="tei tei-q">“annually make an image of a man in wood, put clothes and ornaments on it, and present it before the altar of a Mahádeo. The person who officiates as priest on the occasion says: <span class="tei tei-q">‘O Mahádeo, we sacrifice this man to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page218">[pg 218]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg218" name="Pg218"/> you according to ancient customs. Give us rain in due season, and a plentiful harvest.’</span> Then with one stroke of the axe the head of the image is struck off, and the body is removed and buried.”</span><a href="#note_593" id="noteref_593" name="noteref_593"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">593</span></span></a> Formerly, when a Siamese army was about to take the field a condemned criminal representing the enemy was put to death, but a humane king caused a puppet to be substituted for the man. The effigy is felled by the blow of an axe, and if it drops at the first stroke, the omen is favourable.<a href="#note_594" id="noteref_594" name="noteref_594"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">594</span></span></a> In the East Indian island of Siaoo or Siauw, one of the Sangi group, a child stolen from a neighbouring island used to be sacrificed every year to the spirit of a volcano in order that there might be no eruption. The victim was slowly tortured to death in the temple by a priestess, who cut off the child's ears, nose, fingers, and so on, then consummated the sacrifice by splitting open the breast. The spectacle was witnessed by hundreds of people, and feasting and cock-fighting went on for nine days afterwards. In course of time the annual human victim was replaced by a wooden puppet, which was cut to pieces in the same manner.<a href="#note_595" id="noteref_595" name="noteref_595"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">595</span></span></a> The Kayans of Borneo used to kill slaves at the death of a chief and nail them to the tomb, in order that they might accompany the chief on his long journey to the other world and paddle the canoe in which he must travel. This is no longer done, but instead they put up a wooden figure of a man at the head and another of a woman at the foot of the chief's coffin as it lies in state before the funeral. And a small wooden image of a man is usually fixed on the top of the tomb to row the canoe for the dead chief.<a href="#note_596" id="noteref_596" name="noteref_596"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">596</span></span></a> In ancient times human sacrifices used to be offered at the graves of Mikados and princes of Japan, the personal attendants of the deceased being buried alive within the precincts of the tomb. But a humane emperor ordered that clay images should thenceforth be substituted for live men and women. One of these images is now in the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page219">[pg 219]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg219" name="Pg219"/> British Museum.<a href="#note_597" id="noteref_597" name="noteref_597"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">597</span></span></a> The Toboongkoos of central Celebes, who are reported still to carry home as trophies the heads of their slain enemies, resort to the following cure for certain kinds of sickness. The heathen priestess cuts the likeness of a human head out of the sheath of a sago-leaf and sets it up on three sticks in the courtyard of the house. The patient, arrayed in his or her best clothes, is then brought down into the court and remains there while women dance and sing round the artificial head, and men perform sham fights with shield, spear, and bow, just as they did, or perhaps still do, when they have brought back a human head from a raid. After that the sick man is taken back to the house, and an improvement in his health is confidently expected.<a href="#note_598" id="noteref_598" name="noteref_598"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">598</span></span></a> In this ceremony the sham head is doubtless a substitute for a real one.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Mimic sacrifices of various kinds. Mimic sacrifices of fingers. Mimic rite of circumcision.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>With these mock sacrifices of human lives we may compare mimic sacrifices of other kinds. In southern India, as in many parts of the world, it used to be customary to sacrifice joints of the fingers on certain occasions. Thus among the Morasas, when a grandchild was born in the family, the wife of the eldest son of the grandfather must have the last two joints of the third and fourth fingers of her right hand amputated at a temple of Bhairava. The amputation was performed by the village carpenter with a chisel. Nowadays, the custom having been forbidden by the English Government, the sacrifice is performed in mimicry. Some people stick gold or silver pieces with flour paste to the ends of their fingers and then cut or pull them off. Others tie flowers round the fingers that used to be amputated, and go through a pantomime of cutting the fingers by putting a chisel on the joint and then taking it away. Others again twist gold wires in the shape of rings round their fingers. These the carpenter removes and appropriates.<a href="#note_599" id="noteref_599" name="noteref_599"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">599</span></span></a> In Niué or Savage Island, in the South <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page220">[pg 220]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg220" name="Pg220"/> Pacific, the following custom continued till lately to be observed. When a boy was a few weeks old the men assembled, and a feast was made. On the village square an awning was rigged up, and the child was laid on the ground under it. An old man then approached it, and performed the operation of circumcision on the infant in dumb show with his forefinger. No child was regarded as a full-born member of the tribe till he had been subjected to this rite. The natives say that real circumcision was never performed in their island; but as it was commonly practised in Fiji, Tonga, and Samoa, we may assume that its imitation in Niué was a substitute, introduced at some time or other, for the actual operation.<a href="#note_600" id="noteref_600" name="noteref_600"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">600</span></span></a> Similarly when an adult Hindoo joins the sect of the Daira or Mahadev Mohammedans in Mysore, a mock rite of circumcision is performed on him instead of the real operation. A betel leaf is wrapped round the male member of the neophyte and the loose end of the leaf is snipped off instead of the prepuce.<a href="#note_601" id="noteref_601" name="noteref_601"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">601</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc41" name="toc41"/>
					<a id="pdf42" name="pdf42"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 3. Burying the Carnival.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">It has been customary to kill animal gods and corn gods as well as tree-spirits.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Thus far I have offered an explanation of the rule which required that the priest of Nemi should be slain by his successor. The explanation claims to be no more than probable; our scanty knowledge of the custom and of its <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page221">[pg 221]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg221" name="Pg221"/> history forbids it to be more. But its probability will be augmented in proportion to the extent to which the motives and modes of thought which it assumes can be proved to have operated in primitive society. Hitherto the god with whose death and resurrection we have been chiefly concerned has been the tree-god. But if I can shew that the custom of killing the god and the belief in his resurrection originated, or at least existed, in the hunting and pastoral stage of society, when the slain god was an animal, and that it survived into the agricultural stage, when the slain god was the corn or a human being representing the corn, the probability of my explanation will have been considerably increased. This I shall attempt to do in the sequel, and in the course of the discussion I hope to clear up some obscurities which still remain, and to answer some objections which may have suggested themselves to the reader.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Customs of burying the Carnival and carrying out Death.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>We start from the point at which we left off—the spring customs of European peasantry. Besides the ceremonies already described there are two kindred sets of observances in which the simulated death of a divine or supernatural being is a conspicuous feature. In one of them the being whose death is dramatically represented is a personification of the Carnival; in the other it is Death himself. The former ceremony falls naturally at the end of the Carnival, either on the last day of that merry season, namely Shrove Tuesday, or on the first day of Lent, namely Ash Wednesday. The date of the other ceremony—the Carrying or Driving out of Death, as it is commonly called—is not so uniformly fixed. Generally it is the fourth Sunday in Lent, which hence goes by the name of Dead Sunday; but in some places the celebration falls a week earlier, in others, as among the Czechs of Bohemia, a week later, while in certain German villages of Moravia it is held on the first Sunday after Easter. Perhaps, as has been suggested, the date may originally have been variable, depending on the appearance of the first swallow or some other herald of the spring. Some writers regard the ceremony as Slavonic in its origin. Grimm thought it was a festival of the New Year with the old Slavs, who began <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page222">[pg 222]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg222" name="Pg222"/> their year in March.<a href="#note_602" id="noteref_602" name="noteref_602"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">602</span></span></a> We shall first take examples of the mimic death of the Carnival, which always falls before the other in the calendar.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Effigy of the Carnival burnt at Frosinone in Latium.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>At Frosinone, in Latium, about half-way between Rome and Naples, the dull monotony of life in a provincial Italian town is agreeably broken on the last day of the Carnival by the ancient festival known as the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Radica</span></span>. About four o'clock in the afternoon the town band, playing lively tunes and followed by a great crowd, proceeds to the Piazza del Plebiscito, where is the Sub-Prefecture as well as the rest of the Government buildings. Here, in the middle of the square, the eyes of the expectant multitude are greeted by the sight of an immense car decked with many-coloured festoons and drawn by four horses. Mounted on the car is a huge chair, on which sits enthroned the majestic figure of the Carnival, a man of stucco about nine feet high with a rubicund and smiling countenance. Enormous boots, a tin helmet like those which grace the heads of officers of the Italian marine, and a coat of many colours embellished with strange devices, adorn the outward man of this stately personage. His left hand rests on the arm of the chair, while with his right he gracefully salutes the crowd, being moved to this act of civility by a string which is pulled by a man who modestly shrinks from publicity under the mercy-seat. And now the crowd, surging excitedly round the car, gives vent to its feelings in wild cries of joy, gentle and simple being mixed up together and all dancing furiously the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Saltarello</span></span>. A special feature of the festival is that every one must carry in his hand what is called a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">radica</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“root”</span>), by which is meant a huge leaf of the aloe or rather the agave. Any one who ventured into the crowd without <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page223">[pg 223]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg223" name="Pg223"/> such a leaf would be unceremoniously hustled out of it, unless indeed he bore as a substitute a large cabbage at the end of a long stick or a bunch of grass curiously plaited. When the multitude, after a short turn, has escorted the slow-moving car to the gate of the Sub-Prefecture, they halt, and the car, jolting over the uneven ground, rumbles into the courtyard. A hush now falls on the crowd, their subdued voices sounding, according to the description of one who has heard them, like the murmur of a troubled sea. All eyes are turned anxiously to the door from which the Sub-Prefect himself and the other representatives of the majesty of the law are expected to issue and pay their homage to the hero of the hour. A few moments of suspense and then a storm of cheers and hand-clapping salutes the appearance of the dignitaries, as they file out and, descending the staircase, take their place in the procession. The hymn of the Carnival is now thundered out, after which, amid a deafening roar, aloe leaves and cabbages are whirled aloft and descend impartially on the heads of the just and the unjust, who lend fresh zest to the proceedings by engaging in a free fight. When these preliminaries have been concluded to the satisfaction of all concerned, the procession gets under weigh. The rear is brought up by a cart laden with barrels of wine and policemen, the latter engaged in the congenial task of serving out wine to all who ask for it, while a most internecine struggle, accompanied by a copious discharge of yells, blows, and blasphemy, goes on among the surging crowd at the cart's tail in their anxiety not to miss the glorious opportunity of intoxicating themselves at the public expense. Finally, after the procession has paraded the principal streets in this majestic manner, the effigy of Carnival is taken to the middle of a public square, stripped of his finery, laid on a pile of wood, and burnt amid the cries of the multitude, who thundering out once more the song of the Carnival fling their so-called <span class="tei tei-q">“roots”</span> on the pyre and give themselves up without restraint to the pleasures of the dance.<a href="#note_603" id="noteref_603" name="noteref_603"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">603</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page224">[pg 224]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg224" name="Pg224"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Burying the Carnival in the Abruzzi.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In the Abruzzi a pasteboard figure of the Carnival is carried by four grave-diggers with pipes in their mouths and bottles of wine slung at their shoulder-belts. In front walks the wife of the Carnival, dressed in mourning and dissolved in tears. From time to time the company halts, and while the wife addresses the sympathising public, the grave-diggers refresh the inner man with a pull at the bottle. In the open square the mimic corpse is laid on a pyre, and to the roll of drums, the shrill screams of the women, and the gruffer cries of the men a light is set to it. While the figure burns, chestnuts are thrown about among the crowd. Sometimes the Carnival is represented by a straw-man at the top of a pole which is borne through the town by a troop of mummers in the course of the afternoon. When evening comes on, four of the mummers hold out a quilt or sheet by the corners, and the figure of the Carnival is made to tumble into it. The procession is then resumed, the performers weeping crocodile tears and emphasising the poignancy of their grief by the help of saucepans and dinner bells. Sometimes, again, in the Abruzzi the dead Carnival is personified by a living man who lies in a coffin, attended by another who acts the priest and dispenses holy water in great profusion from a bathing tub.<a href="#note_604" id="noteref_604" name="noteref_604"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">604</span></span></a> In Malta the death of the Carnival used to be mourned by women on the last day of the merry festival. Clad from head to foot in black mantles, they carried through the streets of the city the linen effigy of a corpse, stuffed with straw or hay and decked with leaves and oranges. As they carried it, they chanted dirges, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page225">[pg 225]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg225" name="Pg225"/> stopping after every verse to howl like professional mourners. The custom came to an end about the year 1737.<a href="#note_605" id="noteref_605" name="noteref_605"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">605</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Burial of the Carnival at Lerida in Spain.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>At Lerida, in Catalonia, the funeral of the Carnival was witnessed by an English traveller in 1877. On the last Sunday of the Carnival a grand procession of infantry, cavalry, and maskers of many sorts, some on horseback and some in carriages, escorted the grand car of His Grace Pau Pi, as the effigy was called, in triumph through the principal streets. For three days the revelry ran high, and then at midnight on the last day of the Carnival the same procession again wound through the streets, but under a different aspect and for a different end. The triumphal car was exchanged for a hearse, in which reposed the effigy of his dead Grace: a troop of maskers, who in the first procession had played the part of Students of Folly with many a merry quip and jest, now, robed as priests and bishops, paced slowly along holding aloft huge lighted tapers and singing a dirge. All the mummers wore crape, and all the horsemen carried blazing flambeaux. Down the high street, between the lofty, many-storeyed and balconied houses, where every window, every balcony, every housetop was crammed with a dense mass of spectators, all dressed and masked in fantastic gorgeousness, the procession took its melancholy way. Over the scene flashed and played the shifting cross-lights and shadows from the moving torches: red and blue Bengal lights flared up and died out again; and above the trampling of the horses and the measured tread of the marching multitude rose the voices of the priests chanting the requiem, while the military bands struck in with the solemn roll of the muffled drums. On reaching the principal square the procession halted, a burlesque funeral oration was pronounced over the defunct Pau Pi, and the lights were extinguished. Immediately the devil and his angels darted from the crowd, seized the body and fled away with it, hotly pursued by the whole multitude, yelling, screaming, and cheering. Naturally the fiends were overtaken and dispersed; and the sham corpse, rescued from their clutches, was laid in a grave that had been made ready for its <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page226">[pg 226]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg226" name="Pg226"/> reception. Thus the Carnival of 1877 at Lerida died and was buried.<a href="#note_606" id="noteref_606" name="noteref_606"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">606</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Funeral of the Carnival in France. Execution of Shrove Tuesday in the Ardennes and Franche-Comté.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>A ceremony of the same sort is observed in Provence on Ash Wednesday. An effigy called Caramantran, whimsically attired, is drawn in a chariot or borne on a litter, accompanied by the populace in grotesque costumes, who carry gourds full of wine and drain them with all the marks, real or affected, of intoxication. At the head of the procession are some men disguised as judges and barristers, and a tall gaunt personage who masquerades as Lent; behind them follow young people mounted on miserable hacks and attired as mourners who pretend to bewail the fate that is in store for Caramantran. In the principal square the procession halts, the tribunal is constituted, and Caramantran placed at the bar. After a formal trial he is sentenced to death amid the groans of the mob; the barrister who defended him embraces his client for the last time: the officers of justice do their duty: the condemned is set with his back to a wall and hurried into eternity under a shower of stones. The sea or a river receives his mangled remains.<a href="#note_607" id="noteref_607" name="noteref_607"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">607</span></span></a> At Lussac in the department of Vienne young people, attired in long mourning robes and with woebegone countenances, carry an effigy down to the river on Ash Wednesday and throw it into the river, crying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Carnival is dead! Carnival is dead!”</span><a href="#note_608" id="noteref_608" name="noteref_608"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">608</span></span></a> Throughout nearly the whole of the Ardennes it was and still is customary on Ash Wednesday to burn an effigy which is supposed to represent the Carnival, while appropriate verses are sung round about the blazing figure. Very often an attempt is made to fashion the effigy in the likeness of the husband who is reputed to be least faithful to his wife of any in the village. As might perhaps have been anticipated, the distinction of being selected for portraiture under these painful circumstances has a slight tendency to breed domestic jars, especially when the portrait is burnt in front of the house <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page227">[pg 227]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg227" name="Pg227"/> of the gay deceiver whom it represents, while a powerful chorus of caterwauls, groans, and other melodious sounds bears public testimony to the opinion which his friends and neighbours entertain of his private virtues. In some villages of the Ardennes a young man of flesh and blood, dressed up in hay and straw, used to act the part of Shrove Tuesday (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">Mardi Gras</span></span>), as the personification of the Carnival is often called in France after the last day of the period which he personates. He was brought before a mock tribunal, and being condemned to death was placed with his back to a wall, like a soldier at a military execution, and fired at with blank cartridges. At Vrigne-aux-Bois one of these harmless buffoons, named Thierry, was accidentally killed by a wad that had been left in a musket of the firing-party. When poor Shrove Tuesday dropped under the fire, the applause was loud and long, he did it so naturally; but when he did not get up again, they ran to him and found him a corpse. Since then there have been no more of these mock executions in the Ardennes.<a href="#note_609" id="noteref_609" name="noteref_609"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">609</span></span></a> In Franche-Comté people used to make an effigy of Shrove Tuesday on Ash Wednesday, and carry it about the streets to the accompaniment of songs. Then they brought it to the public square, where the offender was tried in front of the town-hall. Judges muffled in old red curtains and holding big books in their hands pronounced sentence of death. The mode of execution varied with the place. Sometimes it was burning, sometimes drowning, sometimes decapitation. In the last case the effigy was provided with tubes of blood, which spouted gore at the critical moment, making a profound impression on the minds of children, some of whom wept bitterly at the sight. Meantime the onlookers uttered piercing cries and appeared to be plunged in the deepest grief. The proceedings generally wound up in the evening with a ball, which the young married people were obliged to provide for the public entertainment; otherwise their slumbers were apt to be disturbed by the discordant notes of a cat's concert chanted under their windows.<a href="#note_610" id="noteref_610" name="noteref_610"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">610</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page228">[pg 228]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg228" name="Pg228"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Burial of Shrove Tuesday in Normandy. Burning Shrove Tuesday at Saint-Lô.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Normandy on the evening of Ash Wednesday it used to be the custom to hold a celebration called the Burial of Shrove Tuesday. A squalid effigy scantily clothed in rags, a battered old hat crushed down on his dirty face, his great round paunch stuffed with straw, represented the disreputable old rake who after a long course of dissipation was now about to suffer for his sins. Hoisted on the shoulders of a sturdy fellow, who pretended to stagger under the burden, this popular personification of the Carnival promenaded the streets for the last time in a manner the reverse of triumphal. Preceded by a drummer and accompanied by a jeering rabble, among whom the urchins and all the tag-rag and bobtail of the town mustered in great force, the figure was carried about by the flickering light of torches to the discordant din of shovels and tongs, pots and pans, horns and kettles, mingled with hootings, groans, and hisses. From time to time the procession halted, and a champion of morality accused the broken-down old sinner of all the excesses he had committed and for which he was now about to be burned alive. The culprit, having nothing to urge in his own defence, was thrown on a heap of straw, a torch was put to it, and a great blaze shot up, to the delight of the children who frisked round it screaming out some old popular verses about the death of the Carnival. Sometimes the effigy was rolled down the slope of a hill before being burnt.<a href="#note_611" id="noteref_611" name="noteref_611"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">611</span></span></a> At Saint-Lô the ragged effigy of Shrove Tuesday was followed by his widow, a big burly lout dressed as a woman with a crape veil, who emitted sounds of lamentation and woe in a stentorian voice. After being carried about the streets on a litter attended by a crowd of maskers, the figure was thrown into the River Vire. The final scene has been graphically described by Madame Octave Feuillet as she witnessed it in her childhood some fifty years ago. <span class="tei tei-q">“My parents invited friends to see, from the top of the tower of Jeanne Couillard, the funeral procession passing. It was there that, quaffing lemonade—the only refreshment allowed because of the fast—we <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page229">[pg 229]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg229" name="Pg229"/> witnessed at nightfall a spectacle of which I shall always preserve a lively recollection. At our feet flowed the Vire under its old stone bridge. On the middle of the bridge lay the figure of Shrove Tuesday on a litter of leaves, surrounded by scores of maskers dancing, singing, and carrying torches. Some of them in their motley costumes ran along the parapet like fiends. The rest, worn out with their revels, sat on the posts and dozed. Soon the dancing stopped, and some of the troop, seizing a torch, set fire to the effigy, after which they flung it into the river with redoubled shouts and clamour. The man of straw, soaked with resin, floated away burning down the stream of the Vire, lighting up with its funeral fires the woods on the bank and the battlements of the old castle in which Louis XI. and Francis I. had slept. When the last glimmer of the blazing phantom had vanished, like a falling star, at the end of the valley, every one withdrew, crowd and maskers alike, and we quitted the ramparts with our guests. As we returned home my father sang gaily the old popular song:—</span></p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">“</span>
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Shrove Tuesday is dead and his wife has got</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">His shabby pocket-handkerchief and his cracked old pot.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Sing high, sing low,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Shrove Tuesday will come back no more.</span>
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">”</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q"><span class="tei tei-q">‘He will come back! He will come back!’</span> we cried warmly, clapping our hands; and he did come back next year, and I think I should see him still if, after the lapse of half a century, I returned to the land of my birth.”</span><a href="#note_612" id="noteref_612" name="noteref_612">
							<span class="tei tei-noteref">
								<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">612</span>
							</span>
						</a>
					</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Burial of Shrove Tuesday or the Carnival in Brittany.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Upper Brittany the burial of Shrove Tuesday or the Carnival is sometimes performed in a ceremonious manner. Four young fellows carry a straw-man or one of their companions, and are followed by a funeral procession. A show is made of depositing the pretended corpse in the grave, after which the bystanders make believe to mourn, crying out in melancholy tones, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ah! my poor little Shrove Tuesday!”</span> The boy who played the part of Shrove Tuesday bears the name for the whole year.<a href="#note_613" id="noteref_613" name="noteref_613"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">613</span></span></a> At Lesneven in Lower Brittany it was formerly the custom on Ash Wednesday to burn a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page230">[pg 230]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg230" name="Pg230"/> straw-man, covered with rags, after he had been promenaded about the town. He was followed by a representative of Shrove Tuesday clothed with sardines and cods' tails.<a href="#note_614" id="noteref_614" name="noteref_614"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">614</span></span></a> At Pontaven in Finistère an effigy representing the Carnival used to be thrown from the quay into the sea on the morning of Ash Wednesday.<a href="#note_615" id="noteref_615" name="noteref_615"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">615</span></span></a> At La Rochelle the porters and sailors carried about a man of straw representing Shrove Tuesday, then burned it on Ash Wednesday and flung the ashes into the sea.<a href="#note_616" id="noteref_616" name="noteref_616"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">616</span></span></a> In Saintonge and Aunis, which correspond roughly to the modern departments of Charente, children used to drown or burn a figure of the Carnival on the morning of Ash Wednesday.<a href="#note_617" id="noteref_617" name="noteref_617"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">617</span></span></a> The beginning of Lent in England was formerly marked by a custom which has now fallen into disuse. A figure, made up of straw and cast-off clothes, was drawn or carried through the streets amid much noise and merriment; after which it was either burnt, shot at, or thrown down a chimney. This image went by the name of Jack o' Lent, and was by some supposed to represent Judas Iscariot.<a href="#note_618" id="noteref_618" name="noteref_618"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">618</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Burying the Carnival in Germany and Austria.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>A Bohemian form of the custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Burying the Carnival”</span> has been already described.<a href="#note_619" id="noteref_619" name="noteref_619"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">619</span></span></a> The following Swabian form is obviously similar. In the neighbourhood of Tübingen on Shrove Tuesday a straw-man, called the Shrovetide Bear, is made up; he is dressed in a pair of old trousers, and a fresh black-pudding or two squirts filled with blood are inserted in his neck. After a formal condemnation he is beheaded, laid in a coffin, and on Ash Wednesday is buried in the churchyard. This is called <span class="tei tei-q">“Burying the Carnival.”</span><a href="#note_620" id="noteref_620" name="noteref_620"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">620</span></span></a> Amongst some of the Saxons of Transylvania the Carnival is hanged. Thus at Braller on Ash Wednesday or Shrove Tuesday two white and two chestnut horses draw a sledge on which is placed a straw-man swathed in a white cloth; <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page231">[pg 231]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg231" name="Pg231"/> beside him is a cart-wheel which is kept turning round. Two lads disguised as old men follow the sledge lamenting. The rest of the village lads, mounted on horseback and decked with ribbons, accompany the procession, which is headed by two girls crowned with evergreen and drawn in a waggon or sledge. A trial is held under a tree, at which lads disguised as soldiers pronounce sentence of death. The two old men try to rescue the straw-man and to fly with him, but to no purpose; he is caught by the two girls and handed over to the executioner, who hangs him on a tree. In vain the old men try to climb up the tree and take him down; they always tumble down, and at last in despair they throw themselves on the ground and weep and howl for the hanged man. An official then makes a speech in which he declares that the Carnival was condemned to death because he had done them harm, by wearing out their shoes and making them tired and sleepy.<a href="#note_621" id="noteref_621" name="noteref_621"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">621</span></span></a> At the <span class="tei tei-q">“Burial of Carnival”</span> in Lechrain, a man dressed as a woman in black clothes is carried on a litter or bier by four men; he is lamented over by men disguised as women in black clothes, then thrown down before the village dung-heap, drenched with water, buried in the dung-heap, and covered with straw.<a href="#note_622" id="noteref_622" name="noteref_622"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">622</span></span></a> Similarly in Schörzingen, near Schömberg, the <span class="tei tei-q">“Carnival (Shrovetide) Fool”</span> was carried all about the village on a bier, preceded by a man dressed in white, and followed by a devil who was dressed in black and carried chains, which he clanked. One of the train collected gifts. After the procession the Fool was buried under straw and dung.<a href="#note_623" id="noteref_623" name="noteref_623"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">623</span></span></a> In Rottweil the <span class="tei tei-q">“Carnival Fool”</span> is made drunk on Ash Wednesday and buried under straw amid loud lamentation.<a href="#note_624" id="noteref_624" name="noteref_624"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">624</span></span></a> In Wurmlingen the Fool is represented by a young fellow enveloped in straw, who is led about the village by a rope as a <span class="tei tei-q">“Bear”</span> on Shrove Tuesday and the preceding day. He dances to the flute. Then on Ash Wednesday a straw-man is made, placed on a trough, carried out of the village to the sound of drums and <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page232">[pg 232]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg232" name="Pg232"/> mournful music, and buried in a field.<a href="#note_625" id="noteref_625" name="noteref_625"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">625</span></span></a> In Altdorf and Weingarten on Ash Wednesday the Fool, represented by a straw-man, is carried about and then thrown into the water to the accompaniment of melancholy music. In other villages of Swabia the part of fool is played by a live person, who is thrown into the water after being carried about in procession.<a href="#note_626" id="noteref_626" name="noteref_626"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">626</span></span></a> At Balwe, in Westphalia, a straw-man is made on Shrove Tuesday and thrown into the river amid rejoicings. This is called, as usual, <span class="tei tei-q">“Burying the Carnival.”</span><a href="#note_627" id="noteref_627" name="noteref_627"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">627</span></span></a> At Burgebrach, in Bavaria, it used to be customary, as a public pastime, to hold a sort of court of justice on Ash Wednesday. The accused was a straw-man, on whom was laid the burden of all the notorious transgressions that had been committed in the course of the year. Twelve chosen maidens sat in judgment and pronounced sentence, and a single advocate pleaded the cause of the public scapegoat. Finally the effigy was burnt, and thus all the offences that had created a scandal in the community during the year were symbolically atoned for. We can hardly doubt that this custom of burning a straw-man on Ash Wednesday for the sins of a whole year is only another form of the custom, observed on the same day in so many other places, of burning an effigy which is supposed to embody and to be responsible for all the excesses committed during the licence of the Carnival.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Burning the Carnival in Greece. Esthonian custom on Shrove Tuesday.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Greece a ceremony of the same sort was witnessed at Pylos by Mr. E. L. Tilton in 1895. On the evening of the first day of the Greek Lent, which fell that year on the twenty-fifth of February, an effigy with a grotesque mask for a face was borne about the streets on a bier, preceded by a mock priest with long white beard. Other functionaries surrounded the bier and two torch-bearers walked in advance. The procession moved slowly to melancholy music played by a pipe and drum. A final halt was made in the public square, where a circular space was kept clear of the surging crowd. Here a bonfire was kindled, and round it the priest led a wild dance to the same droning music. When the frenzy was at <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page233">[pg 233]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg233" name="Pg233"/> its height, the chief performer put tow on the effigy and set fire to it, and while it blazed he resumed his mad career, brandishing torches and tearing off his venerable beard to add fuel to the flames.<a href="#note_628" id="noteref_628" name="noteref_628"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">628</span></span></a> On the evening of Shrove Tuesday the Esthonians make a straw figure called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">metsik</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“wood-spirit”</span>; one year it is dressed with a man's coat and hat, next year with a hood and a petticoat. This figure is stuck on a long pole, carried across the boundary of the village with loud cries of joy, and fastened to the top of a tree in the wood. The ceremony is believed to be a protection against all kinds of misfortune.<a href="#note_629" id="noteref_629" name="noteref_629"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">629</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Resurrection enacted in these ceremonies.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Sometimes at these Shrovetide or Lenten ceremonies the resurrection of the pretended dead person is enacted. Thus, in some parts of Swabia on Shrove Tuesday Dr. Iron-Beard professes to bleed a sick man, who thereupon falls as dead to the ground; but the doctor at last restores him to life by blowing air into him through a tube.<a href="#note_630" id="noteref_630" name="noteref_630"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">630</span></span></a> In the Harz Mountains, when Carnival is over, a man is laid on a baking-trough and carried with dirges to a grave; but in the grave a glass of brandy is buried instead of the man. A speech is delivered and then the people return to the village-green or meeting-place, where they smoke the long clay pipes which are distributed at funerals. On the morning of Shrove Tuesday in the following year the brandy is dug up and the festival begins by every one tasting the spirit which, as the phrase goes, has come to life again.<a href="#note_631" id="noteref_631" name="noteref_631"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">631</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc43" name="toc43"/>
					<a id="pdf44" name="pdf44"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 4. Carrying out Death.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Carrying out Death in Bavaria.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The ceremony of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death”</span> presents much the same features as <span class="tei tei-q">“Burying the Carnival”</span>; except that the carrying out of Death is generally followed by a ceremony, or at least accompanied by a profession, of bringing in Summer, Spring, or Life. Thus in Middle Franken, a province of Bavaria, on the fourth Sunday in Lent, the village urchins used to make a straw effigy of Death, which <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page234">[pg 234]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg234" name="Pg234"/> they carried about with burlesque pomp through the streets, and afterwards burned with loud cries beyond the bounds.<a href="#note_632" id="noteref_632" name="noteref_632"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">632</span></span></a> The Frankish custom is thus described by a writer of the sixteenth century: <span class="tei tei-q">“At Mid-Lent, the season when the church bids us rejoice, the young people of my native country make a straw image of Death, and fastening it to a pole carry it with shouts to the neighbouring villages. By some they are kindly received, and after being refreshed with milk, peas, and dried pears, the usual food of that season, are sent home again. Others, however, treat them with anything but hospitality; for, looking on them as harbingers of misfortune, to wit of death, they drive them from their boundaries with weapons and insults.”</span><a href="#note_633" id="noteref_633" name="noteref_633"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">633</span></span></a> In the villages near Erlangen, when the fourth Sunday in Lent came round, the peasant girls used to dress themselves in all their finery with flowers in their hair. Thus attired they repaired to the neighbouring town, carrying puppets which were adorned with leaves and covered with white cloths. These they took from house to house in pairs, stopping at every door where they expected to receive something, and singing a few lines in which they announced that it was Mid-Lent and that they were about to throw Death into the water. When they had collected some trifling gratuities they went to the river Regnitz and flung the puppets representing Death into the stream. This was done to ensure a fruitful and prosperous year; further, it was considered a safeguard against pestilence and sudden death.<a href="#note_634" id="noteref_634" name="noteref_634"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">634</span></span></a> At Nuremberg girls of seven to eighteen years of age go through the streets bearing a little open coffin, in which is a doll hidden under a shroud. Others carry a beech branch, with an apple fastened to it for a head, in an open box. They sing, <span class="tei tei-q">“We carry Death into the water, it is well,”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“We carry Death into the water, carry him in and out again.”</span><a href="#note_635" id="noteref_635" name="noteref_635"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">635</span></span></a> In other parts of Bavaria the ceremony took place on the Saturday before the fifth Sunday in Lent, and the performers were boys or girls, according to the sex of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page235">[pg 235]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg235" name="Pg235"/> the last person who died in the village. The figure was thrown into water or buried in a secret place, for example under moss in the forest, that no one might find Death again. Then early on Sunday morning the children went from house to house singing a song in which they announced the glad tidings that Death was gone.<a href="#note_636" id="noteref_636" name="noteref_636"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">636</span></span></a> In some parts of Bavaria down to 1780 it was believed that a fatal epidemic would ensue if the custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death”</span> were not observed.<a href="#note_637" id="noteref_637" name="noteref_637"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">637</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Carrying out Death in Thüringen.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In some villages of Thüringen, on the fourth Sunday of Lent, the children used to carry a puppet of birchen twigs through the village, and then threw it into a pool, while they sang, <span class="tei tei-q">“We carry the old Death out behind the herdsman's old house; we have got Summer, and Kroden's (?) power is destroyed.”</span><a href="#note_638" id="noteref_638" name="noteref_638"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">638</span></span></a> At Debschwitz or Dobschwitz, near Gera, the ceremony of <span class="tei tei-q">“Driving out Death”</span> is or was annually observed on the first of March. The young people make up a figure of straw or the like materials, dress it in old clothes, which they have begged from houses in the village, and carry it out and throw it into the river. On returning to the village they break the good news to the people, and receive eggs and other victuals as a reward. The ceremony is or was supposed to purify the village and to protect the inhabitants from sickness and plague. In other villages of Thüringen, in which the population was originally Slavonic, the carrying out of the puppet is accompanied with the singing of a song, which begins, <span class="tei tei-q">“Now we carry Death out of the village and Spring into the village.”</span><a href="#note_639" id="noteref_639" name="noteref_639"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">639</span></span></a> At the end of the seventeenth and beginning of the eighteenth century the custom was observed in Thüringen as follows. The boys and girls made an effigy of straw or the like materials, but the shape of the figure varied from year to year. In one year it would represent an old man, in the next an old woman, in the third a young man, and in the fourth a maiden, and the dress of the figure varied with the character <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page236">[pg 236]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg236" name="Pg236"/> it personated. There used to be a sharp contest as to where the effigy was to be made, for the people thought that the house from which it was carried forth would not be visited with death that year. Having been made, the puppet was fastened to a pole and carried by a girl if it represented an old man, but by a boy if it represented an old woman. Thus it was borne in procession, the young people holding sticks in their hands and singing that they were driving out Death. When they came to water they threw the effigy into it and ran hastily back, fearing that it might jump on their shoulders and wring their necks. They also took care not to touch it, lest it should dry them up. On their return they beat the cattle with the sticks, believing that this would make the animals fat or fruitful. Afterwards they visited the house or houses from which they had carried the image of Death, where they received a dole of half-boiled peas.<a href="#note_640" id="noteref_640" name="noteref_640"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">640</span></span></a> The custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death”</span> was practised also in Saxony. At Leipsic the bastards and public women used to make a straw effigy of Death every year at Mid-Lent. This they carried through all the streets with songs and shewed it to the young married women. Finally they threw it into the river Parthe. By this ceremony they professed to make the young wives fruitful, to purify the city, and to protect the inhabitants for that year from plague and other epidemics.<a href="#note_641" id="noteref_641" name="noteref_641"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">641</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Carrying out Death in Silesia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Ceremonies of the same sort are observed at Mid-Lent in Silesia. Thus in many places the grown girls with the help of the young men dress up a straw figure with women's clothes and carry it out of the village towards the setting sun. At the boundary they strip it of its clothes, tear it in pieces, and scatter the fragments about the fields. This is called <span class="tei tei-q">“Burying Death.”</span> As they carry the image out, they sing that they are about to bury death under an oak, that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page237">[pg 237]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg237" name="Pg237"/> he may depart from the people. Sometimes the song runs that they are bearing death over hill and dale to return no more. In the Polish neighbourhood of Gross-Strehlitz the puppet is called Goik. It is carried on horseback and thrown into the nearest water. The people think that the ceremony protects them from sickness of every sort in the coming year. In the districts of Wohlau and Guhrau the image of Death used to be thrown over the boundary of the next village. But as the neighbours feared to receive the ill-omened figure, they were on the look-out to repel it, and hard knocks were often exchanged between the two parties. In some Polish parts of Upper Silesia the effigy, representing an old woman, goes by the name of Marzana, the goddess of death. It is made in the house where the last death occurred, and is carried on a pole to the boundary of the village, where it is thrown into a pond or burnt. At Polkwitz the custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death”</span> fell into abeyance; but an outbreak of fatal sickness which followed the intermission of the ceremony induced the people to resume it.<a href="#note_642" id="noteref_642" name="noteref_642"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">642</span></span></a> Some of the Moravians of Silesia make three puppets on this occasion: one represents a man, another a bride, and the third a bridesmaid. The first is carried by the boys, the two last by the girls. Formerly these effigies were torn to pieces at a brook; now they are brought home again.<a href="#note_643" id="noteref_643" name="noteref_643"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">643</span></span></a> In this last custom two of the figures are clearly conceived as bride and bridegroom.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Carrying out Death in Bohemia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Bohemia the children go out with a straw-man, representing Death, to the end of the village, where they burn it, singing—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Now carry we Death out of the village,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The new Summer into the village,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Welcome, dear Summer,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Green little corn.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_644" id="noteref_644" name="noteref_644">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">644</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>At Tabor in Bohemia the figure of Death is carried out of the town and flung from a high rock into the water, while they sing—</p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page238">[pg 238]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg238" name="Pg238"/>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Death swims on the water,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Summer will soon be here,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We carried Death away for you,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We brought the Summer.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And do thou, O holy Marketa,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Give us a good year</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">For wheat and for rye.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_645" id="noteref_645" name="noteref_645">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">645</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In other parts of Bohemia they carry Death to the end of the village, singing—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We carry Death out of the village,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And the New Year into the village.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Dear Spring, we bid you welcome,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Green grass, we bid you welcome.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Behind the village they erect a pyre, on which they burn the straw figure, reviling and scoffing at it the while. Then they return, singing—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We have carried away Death,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And brought Life back.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">He has taken up his quarters in the village,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Therefore sing joyous songs.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_646" id="noteref_646" name="noteref_646">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">646</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Carrying out Death in Moravia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In some German villages of Moravia, as in Jassnitz and Seitendorf, the young folk assemble on the third Sunday in Lent and fashion a straw-man, who is generally adorned with a fur cap and a pair of old leathern hose, if such are to be had. The effigy is then hoisted on a pole and carried by the lads and lasses out into the open fields. On the way they sing a song, in which it is said that they are carrying Death away and bringing dear Summer into the house, and with Summer the May and the flowers. On reaching an appointed place they dance in a circle round the effigy with loud shouts and screams, then suddenly rush at it and tear it to pieces with their hands. Lastly, the pieces are thrown together in a heap, the pole is broken, and fire is set to the whole. While it burns the troop dances merrily round it, rejoicing at the victory won by Spring; and when the fire has nearly died out they go to the householders to beg for a present of eggs wherewith to hold a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page239">[pg 239]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg239" name="Pg239"/> feast, taking care to give as a reason for the request that they have carried Death out and away.<a href="#note_647" id="noteref_647" name="noteref_647"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">647</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The effigy of Death feared and abhorred.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The preceding evidence shews that the effigy of Death is often regarded with fear and treated with marks of hatred and abhorrence. Thus the anxiety of the villagers to transfer the figure from their own to their neighbours' land, and the reluctance of the latter to receive the ominous guest, are proof enough of the dread which it inspires. Further, in Lusatia and Silesia the puppet is sometimes made to look in at the window of a house, and it is believed that some one in the house will die within the year unless his life is redeemed by the payment of money.<a href="#note_648" id="noteref_648" name="noteref_648"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">648</span></span></a> Again, after throwing the effigy away, the bearers sometimes run home lest Death should follow them, and if one of them falls in running, it is believed that he will die within the year.<a href="#note_649" id="noteref_649" name="noteref_649"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">649</span></span></a> At Chrudim, in Bohemia, the figure of Death is made out of a cross, with a head and mask stuck at the top, and a shirt stretched out on it. On the fifth Sunday in Lent the boys take this effigy to the nearest brook or pool, and standing in a line throw it into the water. Then they all plunge in after it; but as soon as it is caught no one more may enter the water. The boy who did not enter the water or entered it last will die within the year, and he is obliged to carry the Death back to the village. The effigy is then burned.<a href="#note_650" id="noteref_650" name="noteref_650"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">650</span></span></a> On the other hand, it is believed that no one will die within the year in the house out of which the figure of Death has been carried;<a href="#note_651" id="noteref_651" name="noteref_651"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">651</span></span></a> and the village out of which Death has been driven is sometimes supposed to be protected against sickness and plague.<a href="#note_652" id="noteref_652" name="noteref_652"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">652</span></span></a> In some villages of Austrian Silesia on the Saturday before Dead Sunday an effigy is made of old clothes, hay, and straw, for the purpose of driving Death out of the village. On Sunday the people, armed with sticks <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page240">[pg 240]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg240" name="Pg240"/> and straps, assemble before the house where the figure is lodged. Four lads then draw the effigy by cords through the village amid exultant shouts, while all the others beat it with their sticks and straps. On reaching a field which belongs to a neighbouring village they lay down the figure, cudgel it soundly, and scatter the fragments over the field. The people believe that the village from which Death has been thus carried out will be safe from any infectious disease for the whole year.<a href="#note_653" id="noteref_653" name="noteref_653"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">653</span></span></a> In Slavonia the figure of Death is cudgelled and then rent in two.<a href="#note_654" id="noteref_654" name="noteref_654"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">654</span></span></a> In Poland the effigy, made of hemp and straw, is flung into a pool or swamp with the words <span class="tei tei-q">“The devil take thee.”</span><a href="#note_655" id="noteref_655" name="noteref_655"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">655</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc45" name="toc45"/>
					<a id="pdf46" name="pdf46"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 5. Sawing the Old Woman.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Sawing the Old Woman at Mid-Lent in Italy.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Sawing the Old Woman,”</span> which is or used to be observed in Italy, France, and Spain on the fourth Sunday in Lent, is doubtless, as Grimm supposes, merely another form of the custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death.”</span> A great hideous figure representing the oldest woman of the village was dragged out and sawn in two, amid a prodigious noise made with cow-bells, pots and pans, and so forth.<a href="#note_656" id="noteref_656" name="noteref_656"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">656</span></span></a> In Palermo the representation used to be still more lifelike. At Mid-Lent an old woman was drawn through the streets on a cart, attended by two men dressed in the costume of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Compagnia de' Bianchi</span></span>, a society or religious order whose function it was to attend and console prisoners condemned to death. A scaffold was erected in a public square; the old woman mounted it, and two mock executioners proceeded, amid a storm of huzzas and hand-clapping, to saw through her neck, or rather through a bladder of blood which had been previously fitted to it. The blood gushed out and the old woman pretended to swoon and die. The last of these mock executions took place in 1737.<a href="#note_657" id="noteref_657" name="noteref_657"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">657</span></span></a> In Florence, during <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page241">[pg 241]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg241" name="Pg241"/> the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, the Old Woman was represented by a figure stuffed with walnuts and dried figs and fastened to the top of a ladder. At Mid-Lent this effigy was sawn through the middle under the <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="it" xml:lang="it"><span style="font-style: italic">Loggie</span></span> of the Mercato Nuovo, and as the dried fruits tumbled out they were scrambled for by the crowd. A trace of the custom is still to be seen in the practice, observed by urchins, of secretly pinning paper ladders to the shoulders of women of the lower classes who happen to shew themselves in the streets on the morning of Mid-Lent.<a href="#note_658" id="noteref_658" name="noteref_658"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">658</span></span></a> A similar custom is observed by urchins in Rome; and at Naples on the first of April boys cut strips of cloth into the shape of saws, smear them with gypsum, and strike passers-by with their "saws" on the back, thus imprinting the figure of a saw upon their clothes.<a href="#note_659" id="noteref_659" name="noteref_659"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">659</span></span></a> At Montalto, in Calabria, boys go about at Mid-Lent with little saws made of cane and jeer at old people, who therefore generally stay indoors on that day. The Calabrian women meet together at this time and feast on figs, chestnuts, honey, and so forth; this they call <span class="tei tei-q">“Sawing the Old Woman”</span>—a reminiscence probably of a custom like the old Florentine one.<a href="#note_660" id="noteref_660" name="noteref_660"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">660</span></span></a> In Lombardy the Thursday of Mid-Lent is known as the Day of the Old Wives (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="it" xml:lang="it"><span style="font-style: italic">il giorno delle vecchie</span></span>). The children run about crying out for the oldest woman, whom they wish to burn; and failing to possess themselves of the original, they make a puppet representing her, which in the evening is consumed on a bonfire. On the Lake of Garda the blaze of light flaring at different points on the hills produces a picturesque effect.<a href="#note_661" id="noteref_661" name="noteref_661"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">661</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Sawing the Old Woman at Mid-Lent in France.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Berry, a region of central France, the custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“Sawing the Old Woman”</span> at Mid-Lent used to be popular, and has probably not wholly died out even now. Here the name of <span class="tei tei-q">“Fairs of the old Wives”</span> was given to certain fairs held in Lent, at which children were made to believe that they would see the Old Woman of Mid-Lent split or sawn asunder. At Argenton and Cluis-Dessus, when Mid-Lent has come, children of ten or twelve years of age scour the streets with <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page242">[pg 242]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg242" name="Pg242"/> wooden swords, pursue the old crones whom they meet, and even try to break into the houses where ancient dames are known to live. Passers-by, who see the children thus engaged, say, <span class="tei tei-q">“They are going to cut or sabre the Old Woman.”</span> Meantime the old wives take care to keep out of sight as much as possible. When the children of Cluis-Dessus have gone their rounds, and the day draws towards evening, they repair to Cluis-Dessous, where they mould a rude figure of an old woman out of clay, hew it in pieces with their wooden swords, and throw the bits into the river. At Bourges on the same day, an effigy representing an old woman was formerly sawn in two on the crier's stone in a public square. About the middle of the nineteenth century, in the same town and on the same day, hundreds of children assembled at the Hospital <span class="tei tei-q">“to see the old woman split or divided in two.”</span> A religious service was held in the building on this occasion, which attracted many idlers. In the streets it was not uncommon to hear cries of <span class="tei tei-q">“Let us cleave the Old Wife! let us cleave the oldest woman of the ward!”</span> At Tulle, on the day of Mid-Lent, the people used to enquire after the oldest woman in the town, and to tell the children that at mid-day punctually she was to be sawn in two at Puy-Saint-Clair.<a href="#note_662" id="noteref_662" name="noteref_662"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">662</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Sawing the Old Woman at Mid-Lent in Spain and among the Slavs.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Barcelona on the fourth Sunday in Lent boys run about the streets, some with saws, others with billets of wood, others again with cloths in which they collect gratuities. They sing a song in which it is said that they are looking for the oldest woman of the city for the purpose of sawing her in two in honour of Mid-Lent; at last, pretending to have found her, they saw something in two and burn it. A like custom is found amongst the South Slavs. In Lent the Croats tell their children that at noon an old woman is being sawn in two outside the gates; and in Carniola also the saying is current that at Mid-Lent an old woman is taken out of the village and sawn in two. The North Slavonian expression for keeping Mid-Lent is <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">bábu rezati</span></span>, that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“sawing the Old Wife.”</span><a href="#note_663" id="noteref_663" name="noteref_663"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">663</span></span></a> In the Graubünden Canton of Switzerland, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page243">[pg 243]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg243" name="Pg243"/> on <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Invocavit</span></span> Sunday, grown people used to assemble in the ale-house and there saw in two a straw puppet which they called Mrs. Winter or the Ugly Woman (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">bagorda</span></span>), while the children in the streets teased each other with wooden saws.<a href="#note_664" id="noteref_664" name="noteref_664"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">664</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Sawing the Old Woman on Palm Sunday among the gypsies.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Among the gypsies of south-eastern Europe the custom of <span class="tei tei-q">“sawing the Old Woman in two”</span> is observed in a very graphic form, not at Mid-Lent, but on the afternoon of Palm Sunday. The Old Woman, represented by a puppet of straw dressed in women's clothes, is laid across a beam in some open place and beaten with clubs by the assembled gypsies, after which it is sawn in two by a young man and a maiden, both of whom wear a disguise. While the effigy is being sawn through, the rest of the company dance round it singing songs of various sorts. The remains of the figure are finally burnt, and the ashes thrown into a stream. The ceremony is supposed by the gypsies themselves to be observed in honour of a certain Shadow Queen; hence Palm Sunday goes by the name Shadow Day among all the strolling gypsies of eastern and southern Europe. According to the popular belief, this Shadow Queen, of whom the gypsies of to-day have only a very vague and confused conception, vanishes underground at the appearance of spring, but comes forth again at the beginning of winter to plague mankind during that inclement season with sickness, hunger, and death. Among the vagrant gypsies of southern Hungary the effigy is regarded as an expiatory and thank offering made to the Shadow Queen for having spared the people during the winter. In Transylvania the gypsies who live in tents clothe the puppet in the cast-off garments of the woman who has last become a widow. The widow herself gives the clothes gladly for this purpose, because she thinks that being burnt they will pass into the possession of her departed husband, who will thus have no excuse for returning from the spirit-land to visit her. The ashes are thrown by the Transylvanian gypsies on the first graveyard that they pass on their journey.<a href="#note_665" id="noteref_665" name="noteref_665"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">665</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page244">[pg 244]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg244" name="Pg244"/> In this gypsy custom the equivalence of the effigy of the Old Woman to the effigy of Death in the customs we have just been considering comes out very clearly, thus strongly confirming the opinion of Grimm that the practice of <span class="tei tei-q">“sawing the Old Woman”</span> is only another form of the practice of <span class="tei tei-q">“carrying out Death.”</span></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Seven-legged effigies of Lent in Spain.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The same perhaps may be said of a somewhat different form which the custom assumes in parts of Spain and Italy. In Spain it is sometimes usual on Ash Wednesday to fashion an effigy of stucco or pasteboard representing a hideous old woman with seven legs, wearing a crown of sorrel and spinach, and holding a sceptre in her hand. The seven skinny legs stand for the seven weeks of the Lenten fast which begins on Ash Wednesday. This monster, proclaimed Queen of Lent amid the chanting of lugubrious songs, is carried in triumph through the crowded streets and public places. On reaching the principal square the people put out their torches, cease shouting, and disperse. Their revels are now ended, and they take a vow to hold no more merry meetings until all the legs of the old woman have fallen one by one and she has been beheaded. The effigy is then deposited in some place appointed for the purpose, where the public is admitted to see it during the whole of Lent. Every week, on Saturday evening, one of the Queen's legs is pulled off; and on Holy Saturday, when from every church tower the joyous clangour of the bells proclaims the glad tidings that Christ is risen, the mutilated body of the fallen Queen is carried with great solemnity to the principal square and publicly beheaded.<a href="#note_666" id="noteref_666" name="noteref_666"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">666</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Seven-legged effigies of Lent in Italy.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>A custom of the same sort prevails in various parts of Italy. Thus in the Abruzzi they hang a puppet of tow, representing Lent, to a cord, which stretches across the street from one window to another. Seven feathers are attached to the figure, and in its hand it grasps a distaff and spindle. Every Saturday in Lent one of the seven feathers is plucked out, and on Holy Saturday, while the bells are ringing, a <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page245">[pg 245]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg245" name="Pg245"/> string of chestnuts is burnt for the purpose of sending Lent and its meagre fare to the devil. In houses, too, it is usual to amuse children by cutting the figure of an old woman with seven legs out of pasteboard and sticking it beside the chimney. The old woman represents Lent, and her seven legs are the seven weeks of the fast; every Saturday one of the legs is amputated. At Mid-Lent the effigy is cut through the middle, and the part of which the feet have been already amputated is removed. Sometimes the figure is stuffed with sweets, dried fruits, and halfpence, for which the street urchins scramble when the puppet is bisected.<a href="#note_667" id="noteref_667" name="noteref_667"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">667</span></span></a> In the Sorrentine peninsula Lent is similarly represented by the effigy of a wrinkled old hag with a spindle and distaff, which is fastened to a balcony or a window. Attached to the figure is an orange with as many feathers stuck into it as there are weeks in Lent, and at the end of each week one of the feathers is plucked out. At Mid-Lent the puppet is sawn in two, an operation which is sometimes attended by a gush of blood from a bladder concealed in the interior of the figure. Any old women who shew themselves in the streets on that day are exposed to jibes and jests, and may be warned that they ought to remain at home.<a href="#note_668" id="noteref_668" name="noteref_668"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">668</span></span></a> At Castellammare, to the south of Naples, an English lady observed a rude puppet dangling from a string which spanned one of the narrow streets of the old town, being fastened at either end, high overhead, to the upper part of the many-storied houses. The puppet, about a foot long, was dressed all in black, rather like a nun, and from the skirts projected five or six feathers which bore a certain resemblance to legs. A peasant being asked what these things meant, replied with Italian vagueness, <span class="tei tei-q">“It is only Lent.”</span> Further enquiries, however, elicited the information that at the end of every week in Lent one of the feather legs was pulled off the puppet, and that the puppet was finally destroyed on the last day of Lent.<a href="#note_669" id="noteref_669" name="noteref_669"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">669</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page246">[pg 246]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg246" name="Pg246"/>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc47" name="toc47"/>
					<a id="pdf48" name="pdf48"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 6. Bringing in Summer.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The custom of carrying out Death is often followed by the ceremony of bringing in Summer, in which the Summer is represented by a tree or branches.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In the preceding ceremonies the return of Spring, Summer, or Life, as a sequel to the expulsion of Death, is only implied or at most announced. In the following ceremonies it is plainly enacted. Thus in some parts of Bohemia the effigy of Death is drowned by being thrown into the water at sunset; then the girls go out into the wood and cut down a young tree with a green crown, hang a doll dressed as a woman on it, deck the whole with green, red, and white ribbons, and march in procession with their <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Líto</span></span> (Summer) into the village, collecting gifts and singing—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Death swims in the water,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Spring comes to visit us,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">With eggs that are red,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">With yellow pancakes.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We carried Death out of the village,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We are carrying Summer into the village.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_670" id="noteref_670" name="noteref_670">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">670</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In many Silesian villages the figure of Death, after being treated with respect, is stript of its clothes and flung with curses into the water, or torn to pieces in a field. Then the young folk repair to a wood, cut down a small fir-tree, peel the trunk, and deck it with festoons of evergreens, paper roses, painted egg-shells, motley bits of cloth, and so forth. The tree thus adorned is called Summer or May. Boys carry it from house to house singing appropriate songs and begging for presents. Among their songs is the following:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We have carried Death out,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We are bringing the dear Summer back,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">The Summer and the May</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And all the flowers gay.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Sometimes they also bring back from the wood a prettily adorned figure, which goes by the name of Summer, May, or the Bride; in the Polish districts it is called Dziewanna, the goddess of spring.<a href="#note_671" id="noteref_671" name="noteref_671"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">671</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page247">[pg 247]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg247" name="Pg247"/>
					<p>At Eisenach on the fourth Sunday in Lent young people used to fasten a straw-man, representing Death, to a wheel, which they trundled to the top of a hill. Then setting fire to the figure they allowed it and the wheel to roll down the slope. Next they cut a tall fir-tree, tricked it out with ribbons, and set it up in the plain. The men then climbed the tree to fetch down the ribbons.<a href="#note_672" id="noteref_672" name="noteref_672"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">672</span></span></a> In Upper Lusatia the figure of Death, made of straw and rags, is dressed in a veil furnished by the last bride and a shirt provided by the house in which the last death took place. Thus arrayed the figure is stuck on the end of a long pole and carried at full speed by the tallest and strongest girl, while the rest pelt the effigy with sticks and stones. Whoever hits it will be sure to live through the year. In this way Death is carried out of the village and thrown into the water or over the boundary of the next village. On their way home each one breaks a green branch and carries it gaily with him till he reaches the village, when he throws it away. Sometimes the young people of the next village, upon whose land the figure has been thrown, run after them and hurl it back, not wishing to have Death among them. Hence the two parties occasionally come to blows.<a href="#note_673" id="noteref_673" name="noteref_673"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">673</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">New potency of life ascribed to the image of Death. Carrying out Death at Braller in Transylvania.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In these cases Death is represented by the puppet which is thrown away, Summer or Life by the branches or trees which are brought back. But sometimes a new potency of life seems to be attributed to the image of Death itself, and by a kind of resurrection it becomes the instrument of the general revival. Thus in some parts of Lusatia women alone are concerned in carrying out Death, and suffer no male to meddle with it. Attired in mourning, which they wear the whole day, they make a puppet of straw, clothe it in a white shirt, and give it a broom in one hand and a scythe in the other. Singing songs and pursued by urchins throwing stones, they carry the puppet to the village boundary, where they tear it in pieces. Then they cut down a fine tree, hang the shirt on it, and carry it home singing.<a href="#note_674" id="noteref_674" name="noteref_674"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">674</span></span></a> On <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page248">[pg 248]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg248" name="Pg248"/> the Feast of Ascension the Saxons of Braller, a village of Transylvania, not far from Hermannstadt, observe the ceremony of <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death”</span> in the following manner. After morning service all the school-girls repair to the house of one of their number, and there dress up the Death. This is done by tying a threshed-out sheaf of corn into a rough semblance of a head and body, while the arms are simulated by a broomstick thrust through it horizontally. The figure is dressed in the holiday attire of a young peasant woman, with a red hood, silver brooches, and a profusion of ribbons at the arms and breast. The girls bustle at their work, for soon the bells will be ringing to vespers, and the Death must be ready in time to be placed at the open window, that all the people may see it on their way to church. When vespers are over, the longed-for moment has come for the first procession with the Death to begin; it is a privilege that belongs to the school-girls alone. Two of the older girls seize the figure by the arms and walk in front: all the rest follow two and two. Boys may take no part in the procession, but they troop after it gazing with open-mouthed admiration at the <span class="tei tei-q">“beautiful Death.”</span> So the procession goes through all the streets of the village, the girls singing the old hymn that begins—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Gott mein Vater, deine Liebe</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Reicht so weit der Himmel ist,</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>to a tune that differs from the ordinary one. When the procession has wound its way through every street, the girls go to another house, and having shut the door against the eager prying crowd of boys who follow at their heels, they strip the Death and pass the naked truss of straw out of the window to the boys, who pounce on it, run out of the village with it without singing, and fling the dilapidated effigy into the neighbouring brook. This done, the second scene of the little drama begins. While the boys were carrying away the Death out of the village, the girls remained in the house, and one of them is now dressed in all the finery which had been worn by the effigy. Thus arrayed she is led in procession through all the streets to the singing of the same hymn as before. When the procession is over <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page249">[pg 249]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg249" name="Pg249"/> they all betake themselves to the house of the girl who played the leading part. Here a feast awaits them from which also the boys are excluded. It is a popular belief that the children may safely begin to eat gooseberries and other fruit after the day on which Death has thus been carried out; for Death, which up to that time lurked especially in gooseberries, is now destroyed. Further, they may now bathe with impunity out of doors.<a href="#note_675" id="noteref_675" name="noteref_675"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">675</span></span></a> Very similar is the ceremony which, down to recent years, was observed in some of the German villages of Moravia. Boys and girls met on the afternoon of the first Sunday after Easter, and together fashioned a puppet of straw to represent Death. Decked with bright-coloured ribbons and cloths, and fastened to the top of a long pole, the effigy was then borne with singing and clamour to the nearest height, where it was stript of its gay attire and thrown or rolled down the slope. One of the girls was next dressed in the gauds taken from the effigy of Death, and with her at its head the procession moved back to the village. In some villages the practice is to bury the effigy in the place that has the most evil reputation of all the country-side: others throw it into running water.<a href="#note_676" id="noteref_676" name="noteref_676"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">676</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Life-giving virtue ascribed to the effigy of Death.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In the Lusatian ceremony described above,<a href="#note_677" id="noteref_677" name="noteref_677"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">677</span></span></a> the tree which is brought home after the destruction of the figure of Death is plainly equivalent to the trees or branches which, in the preceding customs, were brought back as representatives of Summer or Life, after Death had been thrown away or destroyed. But the transference of the shirt worn by the effigy of Death to the tree clearly indicates that the tree is a kind of revivification, in a new form, of the destroyed effigy.<a href="#note_678" id="noteref_678" name="noteref_678"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">678</span></span></a> This comes out also in the Transylvanian and Moravian customs: the dressing of a girl in the clothes worn by the Death, and the leading her about the village to the same song which had been sung when the Death was being <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page250">[pg 250]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg250" name="Pg250"/> carried about, shew that she is intended to be a kind of resuscitation of the being whose effigy has just been destroyed. These examples therefore suggest that the Death whose demolition is represented in these ceremonies cannot be regarded as the purely destructive agent which we understand by Death. If the tree which is brought back as an embodiment of the reviving vegetation of spring is clothed in the shirt worn by the Death which has just been destroyed, the object certainly cannot be to check and counteract the revival of vegetation: it can only be to foster and promote it. Therefore the being which has just been destroyed—the so-called Death—must be supposed to be endowed with a vivifying and quickening influence, which it can communicate to the vegetable and even the animal world. This ascription of a life-giving virtue to the figure of Death is put beyond a doubt by the custom, observed in some places, of taking pieces of the straw effigy of Death and placing them in the fields to make the crops grow, or in the manger to make the cattle thrive. Thus in Spachendorf, a village of Austrian Silesia, the figure of Death, made of straw, brushwood, and rags, is carried with wild songs to an open place outside the village and there burned, and while it is burning a general struggle takes place for the pieces, which are pulled out of the flames with bare hands. Each one who secures a fragment of the effigy ties it to a branch of the largest tree in his garden, or buries it in his field, in the belief that this causes the crops to grow better.<a href="#note_679" id="noteref_679" name="noteref_679"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">679</span></span></a> In the Troppau district of Austrian Silesia the straw figure which the boys make on the fourth Sunday in Lent is dressed by the girls in woman's clothes and hung with ribbons, necklace, and garlands. Attached to a long pole it is carried out of the village, followed by a troop of young people of both sexes, who alternately frolic, lament, and sing songs. Arrived at its destination—a field outside the village—the figure is stripped of its clothes and ornaments; then the crowd rushes at it and tears it to bits, scuffling for the fragments. Every one tries to get a wisp of the straw of which the effigy was made, because such a wisp, placed in the manger, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page251">[pg 251]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg251" name="Pg251"/> is believed to make the cattle thrive.<a href="#note_680" id="noteref_680" name="noteref_680"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">680</span></span></a> Or the straw is put in the hens' nest, it being supposed that this prevents the hens from carrying away their eggs, and makes them brood much better.<a href="#note_681" id="noteref_681" name="noteref_681"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">681</span></span></a> The same attribution of a fertilising power to the figure of Death appears in the belief that if the bearers of the figure, after throwing it away, beat cattle with their sticks, this will render the beasts fat or prolific.<a href="#note_682" id="noteref_682" name="noteref_682"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">682</span></span></a> Perhaps the sticks had been previously used to beat the Death,<a href="#note_683" id="noteref_683" name="noteref_683"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">683</span></span></a> and so had acquired the fertilising power ascribed to the effigy. We have seen, too, that at Leipsic a straw effigy of Death was shewn to young wives to make them fruitful.<a href="#note_684" id="noteref_684" name="noteref_684"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">684</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Summer-tree equivalent to the May-tree. But the Summer-tree is a revival of the image of Death; hence the image of Death must be an embodiment of the spirit of vegetation.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>It seems hardly possible to separate from the May-trees the trees or branches which are brought into the village after the destruction of the Death. The bearers who bring them in profess to be bringing in the Summer,<a href="#note_685" id="noteref_685" name="noteref_685"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">685</span></span></a> therefore the trees obviously represent the Summer; indeed in Silesia they are commonly called the Summer or the May,<a href="#note_686" id="noteref_686" name="noteref_686"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">686</span></span></a> and the doll which is sometimes attached to the Summer-tree is a duplicate representative of the Summer, just as the May is sometimes represented at the same time by a May-tree and a May Lady.<a href="#note_687" id="noteref_687" name="noteref_687"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">687</span></span></a> Further, the Summer-trees are adorned like May-trees with ribbons and so on; like May-trees, when large, they are planted in the ground and climbed up; and like May-trees, when small, they are carried from door to door by boys or girls singing songs and collecting money.<a href="#note_688" id="noteref_688" name="noteref_688"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">688</span></span></a> And as if to demonstrate the identity of the two sets of customs the bearers of the Summer-tree sometimes announce that they are bringing in the Summer and the May.<a href="#note_689" id="noteref_689" name="noteref_689"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">689</span></span></a> The customs, therefore, of bringing in the May and bringing in the Summer are essentially the same; and the Summer-tree is merely another form of the May-tree, the only distinction <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page252">[pg 252]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg252" name="Pg252"/> (besides that of name) being in the time at which they are respectively brought in; for while the May-tree is usually fetched in on the first of May or at Whitsuntide, the Summer-tree is fetched in on the fourth Sunday in Lent. Therefore, if the May-tree is an embodiment of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation, the Summer-tree must likewise be an embodiment of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation. But we have seen that the Summer-tree is in some cases a revivification of the effigy of Death. It follows, therefore, that in these cases the effigy called Death must be an embodiment of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation. This inference is confirmed, first, by the vivifying and fertilising influence which the fragments of the effigy of Death are believed to exercise both on vegetable and on animal life;<a href="#note_690" id="noteref_690" name="noteref_690"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">690</span></span></a> for this influence, as we saw in the first part of this work,<a href="#note_691" id="noteref_691" name="noteref_691"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">691</span></span></a> is supposed to be a special attribute of the tree-spirit. It is confirmed, secondly, by observing that the effigy of Death is sometimes decked with leaves or made of twigs, branches, hemp, or a threshed-out sheaf of corn;<a href="#note_692" id="noteref_692" name="noteref_692"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">692</span></span></a> and that sometimes it is hung on a little tree and so carried about by girls collecting money,<a href="#note_693" id="noteref_693" name="noteref_693"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">693</span></span></a> just as is done with the May-tree and the May Lady, and with the Summer-tree and the doll attached to it. In short we are driven to regard the expulsion of Death and the bringing in of Summer as, in some cases at least, merely another form of that death and revival of the spirit of vegetation in spring which we saw enacted in the killing and resurrection of the Wild Man.<a href="#note_694" id="noteref_694" name="noteref_694"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">694</span></span></a> The burial and resurrection of the Carnival is probably another way of expressing the same idea. The interment of the representative of the Carnival under a dung-heap<a href="#note_695" id="noteref_695" name="noteref_695"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">695</span></span></a> is natural, if he is supposed to possess a quickening and fertilising influence like that ascribed to the effigy of Death. The Esthonians, indeed, who carry the straw figure out of the village in the usual way on Shrove Tuesday, do not call it the Carnival, but the Wood-spirit (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Metsik</span></span>), and they clearly <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page253">[pg 253]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg253" name="Pg253"/> indicate the identity of the effigy with the wood-spirit by fixing it to the top of a tree in the wood, where it remains for a year, and is besought almost daily with prayers and offerings to protect the herds; for like a true wood-spirit the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Metsik</span></span> is a patron of cattle. Sometimes the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Metsik</span></span> is made of sheaves of corn.<a href="#note_696" id="noteref_696" name="noteref_696"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">696</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The names of Carnival, Death, and Summer in the preceding customs seem to cover an ancient tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Thus we may fairly conjecture that the names Carnival, Death, and Summer are comparatively late and inadequate expressions for the beings personified or embodied in the customs with which we have been dealing. The very abstractness of the names bespeaks a modern origin; for the personification of times and seasons like the Carnival and Summer, or of an abstract notion like death, is hardly primitive. But the ceremonies themselves bear the stamp of a dateless antiquity; therefore we can hardly help supposing that in their origin the ideas which they embodied were of a more simple and concrete order. The notion of a tree, perhaps of a particular kind of tree (for some savages have no word for tree in general), or even of an individual tree, is sufficiently concrete to supply a basis from which by a gradual process of generalisation the wider idea of a spirit of vegetation might be reached. But this general idea of vegetation would readily be confounded with the season in which it manifests itself; hence the substitution of Spring, Summer, or May for the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation would be easy and natural. Again, the concrete notion of the dying tree or dying vegetation would by a similar process of generalisation glide into a notion of death in general; so that the practice of carrying out the dying or dead vegetation in spring, as a preliminary to its revival, would in time widen out into an attempt to banish Death in general from the village or district. The view that in these spring ceremonies Death meant originally the dying or dead vegetation of winter has the high support of W. Mannhardt; and he confirms it by the analogy of the name Death as applied to the spirit of the ripe corn. Commonly the spirit of the ripe <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page254">[pg 254]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg254" name="Pg254"/> corn is conceived, not as dead, but as old, and hence it goes by the name of the Old Man or the Old Woman. But in some places the last sheaf cut at harvest, which is generally believed to be the seat of the corn spirit, is called "the Dead One": children are warned against entering the corn-fields because Death sits in the corn; and, in a game played by Saxon children in Transylvania at the maize harvest, Death is represented by a child completely covered with maize leaves.<a href="#note_697" id="noteref_697" name="noteref_697"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">697</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc49" name="toc49"/>
					<a id="pdf50" name="pdf50"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 7. Battle of Summer and Winter.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Dramatic contests between representatives of Summer and Winter.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Sometimes in the popular customs of the peasantry the contrast between the dormant powers of vegetation in winter and their awakening vitality in spring takes the form of a dramatic contest between actors who play the parts respectively of Winter and Summer. Thus in the towns of Sweden on May Day two troops of young men on horseback used to meet as if for mortal combat. One of them was led by a representative of Winter clad in furs, who threw snowballs and ice in order to prolong the cold weather. The other troop was commanded by a representative of Summer covered with fresh leaves and flowers. In the sham fight which followed the party of Summer came off victorious, and the ceremony ended with a feast.<a href="#note_698" id="noteref_698" name="noteref_698"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">698</span></span></a> Again, in the region of the middle Rhine, a representative of Summer clad in ivy combats a representative of Winter clad in straw or moss and finally gains a victory over him. The vanquished foe is thrown to the ground and stripped of his casing of straw, which is torn to pieces and scattered about, while the youthful comrades of the two champions sing a song to commemorate the defeat of Winter by Summer. Afterwards they carry about a summer garland or branch and collect gifts of eggs and bacon from house to house. Sometimes the champion who acts the part of Summer is dressed in leaves and flowers and wears a chaplet of flowers on his head. In the Palatinate this mimic <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page255">[pg 255]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg255" name="Pg255"/> conflict takes place on the fourth Sunday in Lent.<a href="#note_699" id="noteref_699" name="noteref_699"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">699</span></span></a> All over Bavaria the same drama used to be acted on the same day, and it was still kept up in some places down to the middle of the nineteenth century or later. While Summer appeared clad all in green, decked with fluttering ribbons, and carrying a branch in blossom or a little tree hung with apples and pears, Winter was muffled up in cap and mantle of fur and bore in his hand a snow-shovel or a flail. Accompanied by their respective retinues dressed in corresponding attire, they went through all the streets of the village, halting before the houses and singing staves of old songs, for which they received presents of bread, eggs, and fruit. Finally, after a short struggle, Winter was beaten by Summer and ducked in the village well or driven out of the village with shouts and laughter into the forest.<a href="#note_700" id="noteref_700" name="noteref_700"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">700</span></span></a> In some parts of Bavaria the boys who play the parts of Winter and Summer act their little drama in every house that they visit, and engage in a war of words before they come to blows, each of them vaunting the pleasures and benefits of the season he represents and disparaging those of the other. The dialogue is in verse. A few couplets may serve as specimens:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Summer</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Green, green are meadows wherever I pass</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And the mowers are busy among the grass.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Winter</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">White, white are the meadows wherever I go,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And the sledges glide hissing across the snow.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Summer</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I'll climb up the tree where the red cherries glow,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">And Winter can stand by himself down below.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Winter</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">With you I will climb the cherry-tree tall,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Its branches will kindle the fire in the hall.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page256">[pg 256]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg256" name="Pg256"/>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Summer</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">O Winter, you are most uncivil</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">To send old women to the devil.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Winter</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">By that I make them warm and mellow,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">So let them bawl and let them bellow.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Summer</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I am the Summer in white array,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I'm chasing the Winter far, far away.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Winter</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I am the Winter in mantle of furs,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I'm chasing the Summer o'er bushes and burs.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Summer</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Just say a word more, and I'll have you banned</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">At once and for ever from Summer land.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Winter</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">O Summer, for all your bluster and brag,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">You'd not dare to carry a hen in a bag.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
						<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em">
							<span class="tei tei-hi">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-variant: small-caps">Summer</span>
							</span>
						</p>
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">O Winter, your chatter no more can I stay,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I'll kick and I'll cuff you without delay.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Here ensues a scuffle between the two little boys, in which Summer gets the best of it, and turns Winter out of the house. But soon the beaten champion of Winter peeps in at the door and says with a humbled and crestfallen air:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">O Summer, dear Summer, I'm under your ban,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">For you are the master and I am the man.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>To which Summer replies:—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">'Tis a capital notion, an excellent plan,</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">If I am the master and you are the man.</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">So come, my dear Winter, and give me your hand,</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We'll travel together to Summer Land.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_701" id="noteref_701" name="noteref_701">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">701</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page257">[pg 257]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg257" name="Pg257"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Dramatic contests between representatives of Summer and Winter.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>At Goepfritz in Lower Austria, two men personating Summer and Winter used to go from house to house on Shrove Tuesday, and were everywhere welcomed by the children with great delight. The representative of Summer was clad in white and bore a sickle; his comrade, who played the part of Winter, had a fur-cap on his head, his arms and legs were swathed in straw, and he carried a flail. In every house they sang verses alternately.<a href="#note_702" id="noteref_702" name="noteref_702"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">702</span></span></a> At Drömling in Brunswick, down to the present time, the contest between Summer and Winter is acted every year at Whitsuntide by a troop of boys and a troop of girls. The boys rush singing, shouting, and ringing bells from house to house to drive Winter away; after them come the girls singing softly and led by a May Bride, all in bright dresses and decked with flowers and garlands to represent the genial advent of spring. Formerly the part of Winter was played by a straw-man which the boys carried with them; now it is acted by a real man in disguise.<a href="#note_703" id="noteref_703" name="noteref_703"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">703</span></span></a> In Wachtl and Brodek, a German village and a little German town of Moravia, encompassed by Slavonic people on every side, the great change that comes over the earth in spring is still annually mimicked. The long village of Wachtl, with its trim houses and farmyards, nestles in a valley surrounded by pretty pine-woods. Here, on a day in spring, about the time of the vernal equinox, an elderly man with a long flaxen beard may be seen going from door to door. He is muffled in furs, with warm gloves on his hands and a bearskin cap on his head, and he carries a threshing flail. This is the personification of Winter. With him goes a younger beardless man dressed in white, wearing a straw hat trimmed with gay ribbons on his head, and carrying a decorated May-tree in his hands. This is Summer. At every house they receive a friendly greeting and recite a long dialogue in verse, Winter punctuating his discourse with his flail, which he brings down with rude vigour on the backs of all within reach.<a href="#note_704" id="noteref_704" name="noteref_704"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">704</span></span></a> Amongst the Slavonic population near Ungarisch Brod, in Moravia, the ceremony took a somewhat different form. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page258">[pg 258]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg258" name="Pg258"/> Girls dressed in green marched in procession round a May-tree. Then two others, one in white and one in green, stepped up to the tree and engaged in a dialogue. Finally, the girl in white was driven away, but returned afterwards clothed in green, and the festival ended with a dance.<a href="#note_705" id="noteref_705" name="noteref_705"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">705</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Queen of Winter and Queen of May in the Isle of Man.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>On May Day it used to be customary in almost all the large parishes of the Isle of Man to choose from among the daughters of the wealthiest farmers a young maiden to be Queen of May. She was dressed in the gayest attire and attended by about twenty others, who were called maids of honour. She had also a young man for her captain with a number of inferior officers under him. In opposition to her was the Queen of Winter, a man attired as a woman, with woollen hoods, fur tippets, and loaded with the warmest and heaviest clothes, one upon another. Her attendants were habited in like manner, and she too had a captain and troop for her defence. Thus representing respectively the beauty of spring and the deformity of winter they set forth from their different quarters, the one preceded by the dulcet music of flutes and violins, the other by the harsh clatter of cleavers and tongs. In this array they marched till they met on a common, where the trains of the two mimic sovereigns engaged in a mock battle. If the Queen of Winter's forces got the better of their adversaries and took her rival prisoner, the captive Queen of Summer was ransomed for as much as would pay the expenses of the festival. After this ceremony, Winter and her company retired and diverted themselves in a barn, while the partisans of Summer danced on the green, concluding the evening with a feast, at which the Queen and her maids sat at one table and the captain and his troop at another. In later times the person of the Queen of May was exempt from capture, but one of her slippers was substituted and, if captured, had to be ransomed to defray the expenses of the pageant. The procession of the Summer, which was subsequently composed of little girls and called the Maceboard, outlived that of its rival the Winter for some years; but both have now long been things of the past.<a href="#note_706" id="noteref_706" name="noteref_706"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">706</span></span></a></p>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page259">[pg 259]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg259" name="Pg259"/>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Contests between representatives of Summer and Winter among the Esquimaux. Canadian Indians drove away Winter with burning brands.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Among the central Esquimaux of North America the contest between representatives of summer and winter, which in Europe has long degenerated into a mere dramatic performance, is still kept up as a magical ceremony of which the avowed intention is to influence the weather. In autumn, when storms announce the approach of the dismal Arctic winter, the Esquimaux divide themselves into two parties called respectively the ptarmigans and the ducks, the ptarmigans comprising all persons born in winter, and the ducks all persons born in summer. A long rope of sealskin is then stretched out, and each party laying hold of one end of it seeks by tugging with might and main to drag the other party over to its side. If the ptarmigans get the worst of it, then summer has won the game and fine weather may be expected to prevail through the winter.<a href="#note_707" id="noteref_707" name="noteref_707"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">707</span></span></a> In this ceremony it is clearly assumed that persons born in summer have a natural affinity with warm weather, and therefore possess a power of mitigating the rigour of winter, whereas persons born in winter are, so to say, of a cold and frosty disposition and can thereby exert a refrigerating influence on the temperature of the air. In spite of this natural antipathy between the representatives of summer and winter, we may be allowed to conjecture that in the grand tug of war the ptarmigans do not pull at the rope with the same hearty goodwill as the ducks, and that thus the genial influence of summer commonly prevails over the harsh austerity of winter. The Indians of Canada seem also to have imagined that <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page260">[pg 260]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg260" name="Pg260"/> persons are endowed with distinct natural capacities according as they are born in summer or winter, and they turned the distinction to account in much the same fashion as the Esquimaux. When they wearied of the long frosts and the deep snow which kept them prisoners in their huts and prevented them from hunting, all of them who were born in summer rushed out of their houses armed with burning brands and torches which they hurled against the One who makes Winter; and this was supposed to produce the desired effect of mitigating the cold. But those Indians who were born in winter abstained from taking part in the ceremony, for they believed that if they meddled with it the cold would increase instead of diminishing.<a href="#note_708" id="noteref_708" name="noteref_708"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">708</span></span></a> We may surmise that in the corresponding European ceremonies, which have just been described, it was formerly deemed necessary that the actors, who played the parts of Winter and Summer, should have been born in the seasons which they personated.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The burning of Winter at Zurich.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Every year on the Monday after the spring equinox boys and girls attired in gay costume flock at a very early hour into Zurich from the country. The girls, generally clad in white, are called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Mareielis</span></span> and carry two and two a small May tree or a wreath decked with flowers and ribbons. Thus they go in bands from house to house, jingling the bells which are attached to the wreath and singing a song, in which it is said that the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Mareielis</span></span> dance because the leaves and the grass are green and everything is bursting into blossom. In this way they are supposed to celebrate the triumph of Summer and to proclaim his coming. The boys are called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Böggen</span></span>. They generally wear over their ordinary clothes a shirt decked with many-coloured ribbons, tall pointed paper caps on their heads, and masks before their faces. In this quaint costume they cart about through the streets effigies made of straw and other combustible materials which are supposed to represent Winter. At evening these effigies are burned in various parts of the city.<a href="#note_709" id="noteref_709" name="noteref_709"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">709</span></span></a> The ceremony was witnessed at Zurich on Monday, April 20th, 1903, by my friend Dr. J. Sutherland <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page261">[pg 261]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg261" name="Pg261"/> Black, who has kindly furnished me with some notes on the subject. The effigy of Winter was a gigantic figure composed in great part, as it seemed, of cotton-wool. This was laid on a huge pyre, about thirty feet high, which had been erected on the Stadthausplatz close to the lake. In presence of a vast concourse of people fire was set to the pyre and all was soon in a blaze, while the town bells rang a joyous peal. As the figure gradually consumed in the flames, the mechanism enclosed in its interior produced a variety of grotesque effects, such as the gushing forth of bowels. At last nothing remained of the effigy but the iron backbone; the crowd slowly dispersed, and the fire brigade set to work to quench the smouldering embers.<a href="#note_710" id="noteref_710" name="noteref_710"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">710</span></span></a> In this ceremony the contest between Summer and Winter is rather implied than expressed, but the significance of the rite is unmistakable.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc51" name="toc51"/>
					<a id="pdf52" name="pdf52"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 8. Death and Resurrection of Kostrubonko.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Funeral of Kostrubonko, Kostroma, Kupalo, and Yarilo in Russia.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In Russia funeral ceremonies like those of <span class="tei tei-q">“Burying the Carnival”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death”</span> are celebrated under the names, not of Death or the Carnival, but of certain mythic figures, Kostrubonko, Kostroma, Kupalo, Lada, and Yarilo. These Russian ceremonies are observed both in spring and at midsummer. Thus <span class="tei tei-q">“in Little Russia it used to be the custom at Eastertide to celebrate the funeral of a being called Kostrubonko, the deity of the spring. A circle was formed of singers who moved slowly around a girl who lay on the ground as if dead, and as they went they sang,—</span></p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
										<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
											<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Dead, dead is our Kostrubonko!</span>
										</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
										<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
											<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Dead, dead is our dear one!</span>
										</span>
										<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>until the girl suddenly sprang up, on which the chorus joyfully exclaimed,—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%">‘</span>
										<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
											<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Come to life, come to life has our Kostrubonko!</span>
										</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
										<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
											<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Come to life, come to life has our dear one!</span>
										</span>
										<span style="font-size: 90%">’</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span><a href="#note_711" id="noteref_711" name="noteref_711">
									<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">711</span>
									</span>
								</a>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page262">[pg 262]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg262" name="Pg262"/>
					<p>On the Eve of St. John (Midsummer Eve) a figure of Kupalo is made of straw and <span class="tei tei-q">“is dressed in woman's clothes, with a necklace and a floral crown. Then a tree is felled, and, after being decked with ribbons, is set up on some chosen spot. Near this tree, to which they give the name of Marena [Winter or Death], the straw figure is placed, together with a table, on which stand spirits and viands. Afterwards a bonfire is lit, and the young men and maidens jump over it in couples, carrying the figure with them. On the next day they strip the tree and the figure of their ornaments, and throw them both into a stream.”</span><a href="#note_712" id="noteref_712" name="noteref_712"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">712</span></span></a> On St. Peter's Day, the twenty-ninth of June, or on the following Sunday, <span class="tei tei-q">“the Funeral of Kostroma”</span> or of Lada or of Yarilo is celebrated in Russia. In the Governments of Penza and Simbirsk the funeral used to be represented as follows. A bonfire was kindled on the twenty-eighth of June, and on the next day the maidens chose one of their number to play the part of Kostroma. Her companions saluted her with deep obeisances, placed her on a board, and carried her to the bank of a stream. There they bathed her in the water, while the oldest girl made a basket of lime-tree bark and beat it like a drum. Then they returned to the village and ended the day with processions, games, and dances.<a href="#note_713" id="noteref_713" name="noteref_713"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">713</span></span></a> In the Murom district Kostroma was represented by a straw figure dressed in woman's clothes and flowers. This was laid in a trough and carried with songs to the bank of a lake or river. Here the crowd divided into two sides, of which the one attacked and the other defended the figure. At last the assailants gained the day, stripped the figure of its dress and ornaments, tore it in pieces, trod the straw of which it was made under foot, and flung it into the stream; while the defenders of the figure hid their faces in their hands and pretended to bewail the death of Kostroma.<a href="#note_714" id="noteref_714" name="noteref_714"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">714</span></span></a> In the district of Kostroma the burial of Yarilo was celebrated on the twenty-ninth or thirtieth of June. The people chose an old man and gave him a small coffin containing a Priapus-like figure representing <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page263">[pg 263]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg263" name="Pg263"/> Yarilo. This he carried out of the town, followed by women chanting dirges and expressing by their gestures grief and despair. In the open fields a grave was dug, and into it the figure was lowered amid weeping and wailing, after which games and dances were begun, <span class="tei tei-q">“calling to mind the funeral games celebrated in old times by the pagan Slavonians.”</span><a href="#note_715" id="noteref_715" name="noteref_715"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">715</span></span></a> In Little Russia the figure of Yarilo was laid in a coffin and carried through the streets after sunset surrounded by drunken women, who kept repeating mournfully, <span class="tei tei-q">“He is dead! he is dead!”</span> The men lifted and shook the figure as if they were trying to recall the dead man to life. Then they said to the women, <span class="tei tei-q">“Women, weep not. I know what is sweeter than honey.”</span> But the women continued to lament and chant, as they do at funerals. <span class="tei tei-q">“Of what was he guilty? He was so good. He will arise no more. O how shall we part from thee? What is life without thee? Arise, if only for a brief hour. But he rises not, he rises not.”</span> At last the Yarilo was buried in a grave.<a href="#note_716" id="noteref_716" name="noteref_716"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">716</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc53" name="toc53"/>
					<a id="pdf54" name="pdf54"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 9. Death and Revival of Vegetation.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The Russian Kostrubonko, Yarilo, and so on, were probably at first spirits of vegetation dying and coming to life again.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>These Russian customs are plainly of the same nature as those which in Austria and Germany are known as <span class="tei tei-q">“Carrying out Death.”</span> Therefore if the interpretation here adopted of the latter is right, the Russian Kostrubonko, Yarilo, and the rest must also have been originally embodiments of the spirit of vegetation, and their death must have been regarded as a necessary preliminary to their revival. The revival as a sequel to the death is enacted in the first of the ceremonies described, the death and resurrection of Kostrubonko. The reason why in some of these Russian ceremonies the death of the spirit of vegetation is celebrated at midsummer may be that the decline of summer is dated from Midsummer Day, after which the days begin to shorten, and the sun sets out on his downward journey—</p>
					<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
						<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">To the darksome hollows</span>
									</span>
								</span>
							</div>
							<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Where the frosts of winter lie.</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
								</span>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page264">[pg 264]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg264" name="Pg264"/>
					<p>Such a turning-point of the year, when vegetation might be thought to share the incipient though still almost imperceptible decay of summer, might very well be chosen by primitive man as a fit moment for resorting to those magic rites by which he hopes to stay the decline, or at least to ensure the revival, of plant life.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">In these ceremonies grief and gladness, love and hatred appear to be curiously combined.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>But while the death of vegetation appears to have been represented in all, and its revival in some, of these spring and midsummer ceremonies, there are features in some of them which can hardly be explained on this hypothesis alone. The solemn funeral, the lamentations, and the mourning attire, which often characterise these rites, are indeed appropriate at the death of the beneficent spirit of vegetation. But what shall we say of the glee with which the effigy is often carried out, of the sticks and stones with which it is assailed, and the taunts and curses which are hurled at it? What shall we say of the dread of the effigy evinced by the haste with which the bearers scamper home as soon as they have thrown it away, and by the belief that some one must soon die in any house into which it has looked? This dread might perhaps be explained by a belief that there is a certain infectiousness in the dead spirit of vegetation which renders its approach dangerous. But this explanation, besides being rather strained, does not cover the rejoicings which often attend the carrying out of Death. We must therefore recognise two distinct and seemingly opposite features in these ceremonies: on the one hand, sorrow for the death, and affection and respect for the dead; on the other hand, fear and hatred of the dead, and rejoicings at his death. How the former of these features is to be explained I have attempted to shew: how the latter came to be so closely associated with the former is a question which I shall try to answer in the sequel.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Expulsion of Death sometimes enacted without an effigy.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>Before we quit these European customs to go farther afield, it will be well to notice that occasionally the expulsion of Death or of a mythic being is conducted without any visible representative of the personage expelled. Thus at Königshain, near Görlitz in Silesia, all the villagers, young and old, used to go out with straw torches to the top of a neighbouring hill, called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Todtenstein</span></span> (Death-stone), where <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page265">[pg 265]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg265" name="Pg265"/> they lit their torches, and so returned home singing, <span class="tei tei-q">“We have driven out Death, we are bringing back Summer.”</span><a href="#note_717" id="noteref_717" name="noteref_717"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">717</span></span></a> In Albania young people light torches of resinous wood on Easter Eve, and march in procession through the village brandishing them. At last they throw the torches into the river, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ha, Kore, we fling you into the river, like these torches, that you may return no more.”</span> Some say that the intention of the ceremony is to drive out winter; but Kore is conceived as a malignant being who devours children.<a href="#note_718" id="noteref_718" name="noteref_718"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">718</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc55" name="toc55"/>
					<a id="pdf56" name="pdf56"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 10. Analogous Rites in India.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Images of Siva and Pârvatî married, drowned, and mourned for in India.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>In the Kanagra district of India there is a custom observed by young girls in spring which closely resembles some of the European spring ceremonies just described. It is called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ralî Ka melâ</span></span>, or fair of Ralî, the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ralî</span></span> being a small painted earthen image of Siva or Pârvatî. The custom is in vogue all over the Kanagra district, and its celebration, which is entirely confined to young girls, lasts through most of Chet (March-April) up to the Sankrânt of Baisâkh (April). On a morning in March all the young girls of the village take small baskets of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">dûb</span></span> grass and flowers to an appointed place, where they throw them in a heap. Round this heap they stand in a circle and sing. This goes on every day for ten days, till the heap of grass and flowers has reached a fair height. Then they cut in the jungle two branches, each with three prongs at one end, and place them, prongs downwards, over the heap of flowers, so as to make two tripods or pyramids. On the single uppermost points of these branches they get an image-maker to construct two clay images, one to represent Siva, and the other Pârvatî. The girls then divide themselves into two parties, one for Siva and one for Pârvatî, and marry the images in the usual way, leaving out no part of the ceremony. After the marriage they have a feast, the cost of which is defrayed by contributions solicited from their parents. Then at the next Sankrânt (Baisâkh) they all go together to the river-side, throw the images into a deep pool, and weep over the place, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page266">[pg 266]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg266" name="Pg266"/> as though they were performing funeral obsequies. The boys of the neighbourhood often tease them by diving after the images, bringing them up, and waving them about while the girls are crying over them. The object of the fair is said to be to secure a good husband.<a href="#note_719" id="noteref_719" name="noteref_719"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">719</span></span></a></p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">In this Indian custom Siva and Pârvatî seem to be the equivalents of the King and Queen of May.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>That in this Indian ceremony the deities Siva and Pârvatî are conceived as spirits of vegetation seems to be proved by the placing of their images on branches over a heap of grass and flowers. Here, as often in European folk-custom, the divinities of vegetation are represented in duplicate, by plants and by puppets. The marriage of these Indian deities in spring corresponds to the European ceremonies in which the marriage of the vernal spirits of vegetation is represented by the King and Queen of May, the May Bride, Bridegroom of the May, and so forth.<a href="#note_720" id="noteref_720" name="noteref_720"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">720</span></span></a> The throwing of the images into the water, and the mourning for them, are the equivalents of the European customs of throwing the dead spirit of vegetation under the name of Death, Yarilo, Kostroma, and the rest, into the water and lamenting over it. Again, in India, as often in Europe, the rite is performed exclusively by females. The notion that the ceremony helps to procure husbands for the girls can be explained by the quickening and fertilising influence which the spirit of vegetation is believed to exert upon the life of man as well as of plants.<a href="#note_721" id="noteref_721" name="noteref_721"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">721</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<a id="toc57" name="toc57"/>
					<a id="pdf58" name="pdf58"/>
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 11. The Magic Spring.</span>
					</h2>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">The foregoing customs were originally rites intended to ensure the revival of nature in spring by means of imitative magic. Feelings with which the primitive savage may have regarded the changes of the seasons.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The general explanation which we have been led to adopt of these and many similar ceremonies is that they are, or were in their origin, magical rites intended to ensure the revival of nature in spring. The means by which they were supposed to effect this end were imitation and sympathy. Led astray by his ignorance of the true causes of things, primitive man believed that in order to produce the great phenomena of nature on which his life depended he had only to imitate them, and that immediately by a secret <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page267">[pg 267]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg267" name="Pg267"/> sympathy or mystic influence the little drama which he acted in forest glade or mountain dell, on desert plain or wind-swept shore, would be taken up and repeated by mightier actors on a vaster stage. He fancied that by masquerading in leaves and flowers he helped the bare earth to clothe herself with verdure, and that by playing the death and burial of winter he drove that gloomy season away, and made smooth the path for the footsteps of returning spring. If we find it hard to throw ourselves even in fancy into a mental condition in which such things seem possible, we can more easily picture to ourselves the anxiety which the savage, when he first began to lift his thoughts above the satisfaction of his merely animal wants, and to meditate on the causes of things, may have felt as to the continued operation of what we now call the laws of nature. To us, familiar as we are with the conception of the uniformity and regularity with which the great cosmic phenomena succeed each other, there seems little ground for apprehension that the causes which produce these effects will cease to operate, at least within the near future. But this confidence in the stability of nature is bred only by the experience which comes of wide observation and long tradition; and the savage, with his narrow sphere of observation and his short-lived tradition, lacks the very elements of that experience which alone could set his mind at rest in face of the ever-changing and often menacing aspects of nature. No wonder, therefore, that he is thrown into a panic by an eclipse, and thinks that the sun or the moon would surely perish, if he did not raise a clamour and shoot his puny shafts into the air to defend the luminaries from the monster who threatens to devour them. No wonder he is terrified when in the darkness of night a streak of sky is suddenly illumined by the flash of a meteor, or the whole expanse of the celestial arch glows with the fitful light of the Northern Streamers.<a href="#note_722" id="noteref_722" name="noteref_722"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">722</span></span></a> Even phenomena which recur at <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page268">[pg 268]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg268" name="Pg268"/> fixed and uniform intervals may be viewed by him with apprehension, before he has come to recognise the orderliness of their recurrence. The speed or slowness of his recognition of such periodic or cyclic changes in nature will depend largely on the length of the particular cycle. The cycle, for example, of day and night is everywhere, except in the polar regions, so short and hence so frequent that men probably soon ceased to discompose themselves seriously as to the chance of its failing to recur, though the ancient Egyptians, as we have seen, daily wrought enchantments to bring back to the east in the morning the fiery orb which had sunk at evening in the crimson west. But it was far otherwise with the annual cycle of the seasons. To any man a year is a considerable period, seeing that the number of our years is but few at the best. To the primitive savage, with his short memory and imperfect means of marking the flight of time, a year may well have been so long that he failed to recognise it as a cycle at all, and watched the changing aspects of earth and heaven with a perpetual wonder, alternately delighted and alarmed, elated and cast down, according as the vicissitudes of light and heat, of plant and animal life, ministered to his comfort or threatened his existence. In autumn when the withered leaves were whirled about the forest by the nipping blast, and he looked up at the bare boughs, could he feel sure that they would ever be green again? As day by day the sun sank lower and lower in the sky, could he be certain that the luminary would ever retrace his heavenly road? Even the waning moon, whose pale sickle rose thinner and thinner every night over the rim of the eastern horizon, may have excited in his mind a fear lest, when it had wholly vanished, there should be moons no more.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">In modern Europe the old magical rites for the revival of nature in spring have degenerated into mere pageants and pastimes.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>These and a thousand such misgivings may have thronged the fancy and troubled the peace of the man who first began to reflect on the mysteries of the world he lived in, and to take thought for a more distant future than the morrow. It was natural, therefore, that with such thoughts and fears he should have done all that in him lay to bring back the faded blossom to the bough, to swing the low sun of winter up to his old place in the summer sky, and to restore its orbed fulness to <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page269">[pg 269]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg269" name="Pg269"/> the silver lamp of the waning moon. We may smile at his vain endeavours if we please, but it was only by making a long series of experiments, of which some were almost inevitably doomed to failure, that man learned from experience the futility of some of his attempted methods and the fruitfulness of others. After all, magical ceremonies are nothing but experiments which have failed and which continue to be repeated merely because, for reasons which have already been indicated,<a href="#note_723" id="noteref_723" name="noteref_723"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">723</span></span></a> the operator is unaware of their failure. With the advance of knowledge these ceremonies either cease to be performed altogether or are kept up from force of habit long after the intention with which they were instituted has been forgotten. Thus fallen from their high estate, no longer regarded as solemn rites on the punctual performance of which the welfare and even the life of the community depend, they sink gradually to the level of simple pageants, mummeries, and pastimes, till in the final stage of degeneration they are wholly abandoned by older people, and, from having once been the most serious occupation of the sage, become at last the idle sport of children. It is in this final stage of decay that most of the old magical rites of our European forefathers linger on at the present day, and even from this their last retreat they are fast being swept away by the rising tide of those multitudinous forces, moral, intellectual, and social, which are bearing mankind onward to a new and unknown goal. We may feel some natural regret at the disappearance of quaint customs and picturesque ceremonies, which have preserved to an age often deemed dull and prosaic something of the flavour and freshness of the olden time, some breath of the springtime of the world; yet our regret will be lessened when we remember that these pretty pageants, these now innocent diversions, had their origin in ignorance and superstition; that if they are a record of human endeavour, they are also a monument of fruitless ingenuity, of wasted labour, and of blighted hopes; and that for all their gay trappings—their flowers, their ribbons, and their music—they partake far more of tragedy than of farce.</p>
					<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
						<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
							<span style="font-size: 80%">Parallel to the spring customs of Europe in the magical rites of the Central Australian aborigines.</span>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p>The interpretation which, following in the footsteps of <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page270">[pg 270]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg270" name="Pg270"/> W. Mannhardt, I have attempted to give of these ceremonies has been not a little confirmed by the discovery, made since this book was first written, that the natives of Central Australia regularly practise magical ceremonies for the purpose of awakening the dormant energies of nature at the approach of what may be called the Australian spring. Nowhere apparently are the alternations of the seasons more sudden and the contrasts between them more striking than in the deserts of Central Australia, where at the end of a long period of drought the sandy and stony wilderness, over which the silence and desolation of death appear to brood, is suddenly, after a few days of torrential rain, transformed into a landscape smiling with verdure and peopled with teeming multitudes of insects and lizards, of frogs and birds. The marvellous change which passes over the face of nature at such times has been compared even by European observers to the effect of magic;<a href="#note_724" id="noteref_724" name="noteref_724"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">724</span></span></a> no wonder, then, that the savage should regard it as such in very deed. Now it is just when there is promise of the approach of a good season that the natives of Central Australia are wont especially to perform those magical ceremonies of which the avowed intention is to multiply the plants and animals they use as food.<a href="#note_725" id="noteref_725" name="noteref_725"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">725</span></span></a> These ceremonies, therefore, present a close analogy to the spring customs of our European peasantry not only in the time of their celebration, but also in their aim; for we can hardly doubt that in instituting rites designed to assist the revival of plant life in spring our primitive forefathers were moved, not by any sentimental wish to smell at early violets, or pluck the rathe primrose, or watch yellow daffodils dancing in the breeze, but by the very practical consideration, certainly not formulated in abstract terms, that the life of man is inextricably bound up with that of plants, and that if they were to perish he could not survive. And as the faith of the Australian savage in the efficacy of his magic rites is confirmed by observing that their performance is invariably followed, sooner or later, by that increase of vegetable and animal life which it is their <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page271">[pg 271]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg271" name="Pg271"/> object to produce, so, we may suppose, it was with European savages in the olden time. The sight of the fresh green in brake and thicket, of vernal flowers blowing on mossy banks, of swallows arriving from the south, and of the sun mounting daily higher in the sky, would be welcomed by them as so many visible signs that their enchantments were indeed taking effect, and would inspire them with a cheerful confidence that all was well with a world which they could thus mould to suit their wishes. Only in autumn days, as summer slowly faded, would their confidence again be dashed by doubts and misgivings at symptoms of decay, which told how vain were all their efforts to stave off for ever the approach of winter and of death.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page273">[pg 273]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg273" name="Pg273"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
