<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc23" name="toc23"/>
				<a id="pdf24" name="pdf24"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter XII. Homoeopathic Magic of a Flesh Diet.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>The practice of killing a god has now been traced amongst peoples who have reached the agricultural stage of society. We have seen that the spirit of the corn, or of other cultivated plants, is commonly represented either in human or in animal form, and that in some places a custom has prevailed of killing annually either the human or the animal representative of the god. One reason for thus killing the corn-spirit in the person of his representative has been given implicitly in an earlier part of this work: we may suppose that the intention was to guard him or her (for the corn-spirit is often feminine) from the enfeeblement of old age by transferring the spirit, while still hale and hearty, to the person of a youthful and vigorous successor. Apart from the desirability of renewing his divine energies, the death of the corn-spirit may have been deemed inevitable under the sickles or the knives of the reapers, and his worshippers may accordingly have felt bound to acquiesce in the sad necessity.<a href="#note_387" id="noteref_387" name="noteref_387"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">387</span></span></a> But, further, we have found a widespread custom of eating the god sacramentally, either in the shape of the man or animal who represents the god, or in the shape of bread made in human or animal form. The reasons for thus partaking of the body of the god are, from the primitive standpoint, simple enough. The savage commonly believes that by eating the flesh of an animal or man he acquires not only the physical, but even the moral and intellectual qualities which were characteristic of that animal or man; so when the creature is deemed divine, our simple savage naturally expects to absorb a portion of its divinity along with its material substance. It may be well to illustrate by instances this common faith in the acquisition of virtues or vices of many kinds through the medium of animal food, even when there is no pretence that the viands consist of the body or blood of a god. The doctrine forms part of the widely ramified system of sympathetic or homoeopathic magic.</p>
				<p>Thus, for example, the Creeks, Cherokee, and kindred tribes of North American Indians <span class="tei tei-q">“believe that nature is possest of such a property, as to transfuse into men and animals the qualities, either of the food they use, or of those objects that are presented to their senses; he who feeds on venison is, according to their physical system, swifter and more sagacious than the man who lives on the flesh of the clumsy bear, or helpless dunghill fowls, the slow-footed tame cattle, or the heavy wallowing swine. This is the reason that several of their old men recommend, and say, that formerly their greatest chieftains observed a constant rule in their diet, and seldom ate of any animal of a gross quality, or heavy motion of body, fancying it conveyed a dullness through the whole system, and disabled them from exerting themselves with proper vigour in their martial, civil, and religious duties.”</span><a href="#note_388" id="noteref_388" name="noteref_388"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">388</span></span></a> The Zaparo Indians of Ecuador <span class="tei tei-q">“will, unless from necessity, in most cases not eat any heavy meats, such as tapir and peccary, but confine themselves to birds, monkeys, deer, fish, etc., principally because they argue that the heavier meats make them unwieldy, like the animals who supply the flesh, impeding their agility, and unfitting them for the chase.”</span><a href="#note_389" id="noteref_389" name="noteref_389"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">389</span></span></a> Similarly some of the Brazilian Indians would eat no beast, bird, or fish that ran, flew, or swam slowly, lest by partaking of its flesh they should lose their agility and be unable to escape from their enemies.<a href="#note_390" id="noteref_390" name="noteref_390"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">390</span></span></a> The Caribs abstained from the flesh of pigs lest it should cause them to have small eyes like pigs; and they refused to partake of tortoises from a fear that if they did so they would become heavy and stupid like the animal.<a href="#note_391" id="noteref_391" name="noteref_391"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">391</span></span></a> Among the Fans of West Africa men in the prime of life never eat tortoises for a similar reason; they imagine that if they did so, their vigour and fleetness of foot would be gone. But old men may eat tortoises freely, because having already lost the power of running they can take no harm from the flesh of the slow-footed creature.<a href="#note_392" id="noteref_392" name="noteref_392"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">392</span></span></a> Some of the Chiriguanos of eastern Bolivia would not touch the flesh of the vicuña, because they imagined that if they ate it they would become woolly like the vicuña.<a href="#note_393" id="noteref_393" name="noteref_393"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">393</span></span></a> On the other hand the Abipones of Paraguay ate the flesh of jaguars in order to acquire the courage of the beast;<a href="#note_394" id="noteref_394" name="noteref_394"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">394</span></span></a> indeed the number of jaguars which they consumed for this object is said to have been very great, and with a like intent they eagerly devoured the flesh of bulls, stags, boars, and ant-bears, being persuaded that by frequently partaking of such food they increased their strength, activity, and courage. On the other hand they all abhorred the thought of eating hens, eggs, sheep, fish, and tortoises, because they believed that these tender viands begot sloth and listlessness in their bodies and cowardice in their minds.<a href="#note_395" id="noteref_395" name="noteref_395"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">395</span></span></a> The Thompson Indians of British Columbia would not eat the heart of the fool-hen, nor would they allow their dogs to devour the bird, lest they should grow foolish like the bird.<a href="#note_396" id="noteref_396" name="noteref_396"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">396</span></span></a></p>
				<p>While many savages thus fear to eat the flesh of slow-footed animals lest they should themselves become slow-footed, the Bushmen of South Africa purposely ate the flesh of such creatures, and the reason which they gave for doing so exhibits a curious refinement of savage philosophy. They imagined that the game which they pursued would be influenced sympathetically by the food in the body of the hunter, so that if he had eaten of swift-footed animals, the quarry would be swift-footed also and would escape him; whereas if he had eaten of slow-footed animals, the quarry would also be slow-footed, and he would be able to overtake and kill it. For that reason hunters of gemsbok particularly avoided eating the flesh of the swift and agile springbok; indeed they would not even touch it with their hands, because they believed the springbok to be a very lively creature which did not go to sleep at night, and they thought that if they ate springbok, the gemsbok which they hunted would likewise not be willing to go to sleep, even at night. How, then, could they catch it?<a href="#note_397" id="noteref_397" name="noteref_397"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">397</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Certain tribes on the Upper Zambesi believe in transmigration, and every man in his lifetime chooses the kind of animal whose body he wishes at death to enter. He then performs an initiatory rite, which consists in swallowing the maggots bred in the putrid carcase of the animal of his choice; thenceforth he partakes of that animal's nature. And on the occasion of a calamity, while the women are giving themselves up to lamentation, you will see one man writhing on the ground like a boa constrictor or a crocodile, another howling and leaping like a panther, a third baying like a jackal, roaring like a lion, or grunting like a hippopotamus, all of them imitating the characters of the various animals to perfection.<a href="#note_398" id="noteref_398" name="noteref_398"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">398</span></span></a> Clearly these people imagine that the soul or vital essence of the animal is manifested in the maggots bred in its decaying carcase; hence they imagine that by swallowing the maggots they imbue themselves with the very life and spirit of the creature which they desire to become. The Namaquas abstain from eating the flesh of hares, because they think it would make them faint-hearted as a hare. But they eat the flesh of the lion, or drink the blood of the leopard or lion, to get the courage and strength of these beasts.<a href="#note_399" id="noteref_399" name="noteref_399"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">399</span></span></a> The Bushmen will not give their children a jackal's heart to eat, lest it should make them timid like the jackal; but they give them a leopard's heart to eat to make them brave like the leopard.<a href="#note_400" id="noteref_400" name="noteref_400"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">400</span></span></a> When a Wagogo man of German East Africa kills a lion, he eats the heart in order to become brave like a lion; but he thinks that to eat the heart of a hen would make him timid.<a href="#note_401" id="noteref_401" name="noteref_401"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">401</span></span></a> Among the Ja-luo, a tribe of Nilotic negroes, young men eat the flesh of leopards in order to make themselves fierce in war.<a href="#note_402" id="noteref_402" name="noteref_402"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">402</span></span></a> The flesh of the lion and also that of the spotted leopard are sometimes cooked and eaten by native warriors in South-Eastern Africa, who hope thereby to become as brave as lions.<a href="#note_403" id="noteref_403" name="noteref_403"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">403</span></span></a> When a Zulu army assembles to go forth to battle, the warriors eat slices of meat which is smeared with a powder made of the dried flesh of various animals, such as the leopard, lion, elephant, snakes, and so on; for thus it is thought that the soldiers will acquire the bravery and other warlike qualities of these animals. Sometimes if a Zulu has killed a wild beast, for instance a leopard, he will give his children the blood to drink, and will roast the heart for them to eat, expecting that they will thus grow up brave and daring men. But others say that this is dangerous, because it is apt to produce courage without prudence, and to make a man rush heedlessly on his death.<a href="#note_404" id="noteref_404" name="noteref_404"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">404</span></span></a> Among the Wabondei of Eastern Africa the heart of a lion or leopard is eaten with the intention of making the eater strong and brave.<a href="#note_405" id="noteref_405" name="noteref_405"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">405</span></span></a> In British Central Africa aspirants after courage consume the flesh and especially the hearts of lions, while lecherous persons eat the testicles of goats.<a href="#note_406" id="noteref_406" name="noteref_406"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">406</span></span></a> Among the Suk of British East Africa the fat and heart of a lion are sometimes given to children to eat in order that they may become strong; but they are not allowed to know what they are eating.<a href="#note_407" id="noteref_407" name="noteref_407"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">407</span></span></a> Arab women in North Africa give their male children a piece of a lion's heart to eat to make them fearless.<a href="#note_408" id="noteref_408" name="noteref_408"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">408</span></span></a> The flesh of an elephant is thought by the Ewe-speaking peoples of West Africa to make the eater strong.<a href="#note_409" id="noteref_409" name="noteref_409"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">409</span></span></a> Before they go forth to fight, Wajagga warriors drink a magical potion, which often consists of shavings of the horn and hide of a rhinoceros mixed with beer; this is supposed to impart to them the strength and force of the animal.<a href="#note_410" id="noteref_410" name="noteref_410"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">410</span></span></a> When a serious disease has attacked a Zulu kraal, the medicine-man takes the bone of a very old dog, or the bone of an old cow, bull, or other very old animal, and administers it to the healthy as well as to the sick people, in order that they may live to be as old as the animal of whose bone they have partaken.<a href="#note_411" id="noteref_411" name="noteref_411"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">411</span></span></a> So to restore the aged Aeson to youth, the witch Medea infused into his veins a decoction of the liver of the long-lived deer and the head of a crow that had outlived nine generations of men.<a href="#note_412" id="noteref_412" name="noteref_412"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">412</span></span></a> In antiquity the flesh of deer and crows was eaten for other purposes than that of prolonging life. As deer were supposed not to suffer from fever, some women used to taste venison every morning, and it is said that in consequence they lived to a great age without ever being attacked by a fever; only the venison lost all its virtue if the animal had been killed by more blows than one.<a href="#note_413" id="noteref_413" name="noteref_413"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">413</span></span></a> Again, ancient diviners sought to imbue themselves with the spirit of prophecy by swallowing vital portions of birds and beasts of omen; for example, they thought that by eating the hearts of crows or moles or hawks they took into their bodies, along with the flesh, the prophetic soul of the creature.<a href="#note_414" id="noteref_414" name="noteref_414"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">414</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Among the Dyaks of North-West Borneo young men and warriors may not eat venison, because it would make them as timid as deer; but the women and very old men are free to eat it.<a href="#note_415" id="noteref_415" name="noteref_415"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">415</span></span></a> However, among the Kayans of the same region, who share the same view as to the ill effect of eating venison, men will partake of the dangerous viand provided it is cooked in the open air, for then the timid spirit of the animal is supposed to escape at once into the jungle and not to enter into the eater.<a href="#note_416" id="noteref_416" name="noteref_416"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">416</span></span></a> The Aino of Japan think that the otter is a very forgetful animal, and they often call a person with a bad memory an <span class="tei tei-q">“otter head.”</span> Therefore it is a rule with them that <span class="tei tei-q">“the otter's head must not lightly be used as an article of food, for unless people are very careful they will, if they eat it, become as forgetful as that creature. And hence it happens that when an otter has been killed the people do not usually eat the head. But if they are seized with a very strong desire for a feast of otter's head, they may partake thereof, providing proper precautions are taken. When eating it the people must take their swords, knives, axes, bows and arrows, tobacco-boxes and pipes, trays, cups, garden tools, and everything they possess, tie them up in bundles with carrying slings, and sit with them attached to their heads while in the act of eating. This feast may be partaken of in this way, and no other. If this method be carefully adhered to, there will be no danger of forgetting where a thing has been placed, otherwise loss of memory will be the result.”</span><a href="#note_417" id="noteref_417" name="noteref_417"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">417</span></span></a> On the other hand the Aino believe that the heart of the water-ousel is exceedingly wise, and that in speech the bird is most eloquent. Therefore whenever he is killed, he should be at once torn open and his heart wrenched out and swallowed before it has time to grow cold or suffer damage of any kind. If a man swallows it thus, he will become very fluent and wise, and will be able to argue down all his adversaries.<a href="#note_418" id="noteref_418" name="noteref_418"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">418</span></span></a> In Northern India people fancy that if you eat the eyeballs of an owl you will be able like an owl to see in the dark.<a href="#note_419" id="noteref_419" name="noteref_419"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">419</span></span></a></p>
				<p>When the Kansas Indians were going to war, a feast used to be held in the chief's hut, and the principal dish was dog's flesh, because, said the Indians, the animal who is so brave that he will let himself be cut in pieces in defence of his master, must needs inspire valour.<a href="#note_420" id="noteref_420" name="noteref_420"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">420</span></span></a> On extraordinary occasions the bravest warriors of the Dacotas used to perform a dance at which they devoured the livers of dogs raw and warm in order thereby to acquire the sagacity and bravery of the dog. The animals were thrown to them alive, killed, and cut open; then the livers were extracted, cut into strips, and hung on a pole. Each dancer grabbed at a strip of liver with his teeth and chewed and swallowed it as he danced: he might not touch it with his hands, only the medicine-man enjoyed that privilege. Women did not join in the dance.<a href="#note_421" id="noteref_421" name="noteref_421"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">421</span></span></a> Men of the Buru and Aru Islands, East Indies, eat the flesh of dogs in order to be bold and nimble in war.<a href="#note_422" id="noteref_422" name="noteref_422"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">422</span></span></a> Amongst the Papuans of the Port Moresby and Motumotu districts, New Guinea, young lads eat strong pig, wallaby, and large fish, in order to acquire the strength of the animal or fish.<a href="#note_423" id="noteref_423" name="noteref_423"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">423</span></span></a> Some of the natives of Northern Australia fancy that by eating the flesh of the kangaroo or emu they are enabled to jump or run faster than before.<a href="#note_424" id="noteref_424" name="noteref_424"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">424</span></span></a> The Miris of Assam prize tiger's flesh as food for men; it gives them strength and courage. But <span class="tei tei-q">“it is not suited for women; it would make them too strong-minded.”</span><a href="#note_425" id="noteref_425" name="noteref_425"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">425</span></span></a> In Corea the bones of tigers fetch a higher price than those of leopards as a means of inspiring courage. A Chinaman in Seoul bought and ate a whole tiger to make himself brave and fierce.<a href="#note_426" id="noteref_426" name="noteref_426"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">426</span></span></a> The special seat of courage, according to the Chinese, is the gall-bladder; so they sometimes procure the gall-bladders of tigers and bears, and eat the bile in the belief that it will give them courage.<a href="#note_427" id="noteref_427" name="noteref_427"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">427</span></span></a> Again, the Similkameen Indians of British Columbia imagine that to eat the heart of a bear inspires courage.<a href="#note_428" id="noteref_428" name="noteref_428"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">428</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Norse legend, Ingiald, son of King Aunund, was timid in his youth, but after eating the heart of a wolf he became very bold; Hialto gained strength and courage by eating the heart of a bear and drinking its blood;<a href="#note_429" id="noteref_429" name="noteref_429"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">429</span></span></a> and when Sigurd killed the dragon Fafnir and tasted his heart's blood, he acquired thereby a knowledge of the language of birds.<a href="#note_430" id="noteref_430" name="noteref_430"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">430</span></span></a> The belief that the language of birds or of animals in general can be learned by eating some part of a serpent appears to be ancient and wide-spread. Democritus is reported to have said that serpents were generated from the mixed blood of certain birds, and that therefore whoever ate a serpent would understand the bird language.<a href="#note_431" id="noteref_431" name="noteref_431"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">431</span></span></a> The Arabs in antiquity were supposed to be able to draw omens from birds because they had gained a knowledge of the bird language by eating either the heart or liver of a serpent; and the people of Paraka in India are said to have learned the language of animals in general by the same means.<a href="#note_432" id="noteref_432" name="noteref_432"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">432</span></span></a> Saxo Grammaticus relates how Rollo acquired all knowledge, including an understanding of the speech of animals, both wild and tame, by eating of a black serpent.<a href="#note_433" id="noteref_433" name="noteref_433"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">433</span></span></a> In Norway, Sweden, and Jutland down to the nineteenth century the flesh of a white snake was thought to confer supernatural wisdom on the eater;<a href="#note_434" id="noteref_434" name="noteref_434"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">434</span></span></a> it is a German and Bohemian superstition that whoever eats serpent's flesh understands the language of animals.<a href="#note_435" id="noteref_435" name="noteref_435"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">435</span></span></a> Notions of the same sort, based no doubt on a belief in the extraordinary wisdom or subtlety of the serpent, often meet us in popular tales and traditions.<a href="#note_436" id="noteref_436" name="noteref_436"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">436</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Morocco lethargic patients are given ants to swallow, and to eat lion's flesh will make a coward brave;<a href="#note_437" id="noteref_437" name="noteref_437"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">437</span></span></a> but people abstain from eating the hearts of fowls, lest thereby they should be rendered timid.<a href="#note_438" id="noteref_438" name="noteref_438"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">438</span></span></a> When a child is late in learning to speak, the Turks of Central Asia will give it the tongues of certain birds to eat.<a href="#note_439" id="noteref_439" name="noteref_439"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">439</span></span></a> A North American Indian thought that brandy must be a decoction of hearts and tongues, <span class="tei tei-q">“because,”</span> said he, <span class="tei tei-q">“after drinking it I fear nothing, and I talk wonderfully.”</span><a href="#note_440" id="noteref_440" name="noteref_440"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">440</span></span></a> In Java there is a tiny earthworm which now and then utters a shrill sound like that of the alarum of a small clock. Hence when a public dancing girl has screamed herself hoarse in the exercise of her calling, the leader of the troop makes her eat some of these worms, in the belief that thus she will regain her voice and will, after swallowing them, be able to scream as shrilly as ever.<a href="#note_441" id="noteref_441" name="noteref_441"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">441</span></span></a> The people of Darfur, in Central Africa, think that the liver is the seat of the soul, and that a man may enlarge his soul by eating the liver of an animal. <span class="tei tei-q">“Whenever an animal is killed its liver is taken out and eaten, but the people are most careful not to touch it with their hands, as it is considered sacred; it is cut up in small pieces and eaten raw, the bits being conveyed to the mouth on the point of a knife, or the sharp point of a stick. Any one who may accidentally touch the liver is strictly forbidden to partake of it, which prohibition is regarded as a great misfortune for him.”</span> Women are not allowed to eat liver, because they have no soul.<a href="#note_442" id="noteref_442" name="noteref_442"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">442</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Again, the flesh and blood of dead men are commonly eaten and drunk to inspire bravery, wisdom, or other qualities for which the men themselves were remarkable, or which are supposed to have their special seat in the particular part eaten. Thus among the mountain tribes of South-Eastern Africa there are ceremonies by which the youths are formed into guilds or lodges, and among the rites of initiation there is one which is intended to infuse courage, intelligence, and other qualities into the novices. Whenever an enemy who has behaved with conspicuous bravery is killed, his liver, which is considered the seat of valour; his ears, which are supposed to be the seat of intelligence; the skin of his forehead, which is regarded as the seat of perseverance; his testicles, which are held to be the seat of strength; and other members, which are viewed as the seat of other virtues, are cut from his body and baked to cinders. The ashes are carefully kept in the horn of a bull, and, during the ceremonies observed at circumcision, are mixed with other ingredients into a kind of paste, which is administered by the tribal priest to the youths. By this means the strength, valour, intelligence, and other virtues of the slain are believed to be imparted to the eaters.<a href="#note_443" id="noteref_443" name="noteref_443"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">443</span></span></a> When Basutos of the mountains have killed a very brave foe, they immediately cut out his heart and eat it, because this is supposed to give them his courage and strength in battle. At the close of the war the man who has slain such a foe is called before the chief and gets from the doctor a medicine which he chews with his food. The third day after this he must wash his body in running water, and at the expiry of ten days he may return to his wives and children.<a href="#note_444" id="noteref_444" name="noteref_444"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">444</span></span></a> So an Ovambo warrior in battle will tear out the heart of his slain foe in the belief that by eating it he can acquire the bravery of the dead man.<a href="#note_445" id="noteref_445" name="noteref_445"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">445</span></span></a> A similar belief and practice prevail among some of the tribes of British Central Africa, notably among the Angoni. These tribes also mutilate the dead and reduce the severed parts to ashes. Afterwards the ashes are stirred into a broth or gruel, <span class="tei tei-q">“which must be <span class="tei tei-q">‘lapped’</span> up with the hand and thrown into the mouth, but not eaten as ordinary food is taken, to give the soldiers courage, perseverance, fortitude, strategy, patience and wisdom.”</span><a href="#note_446" id="noteref_446" name="noteref_446"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">446</span></span></a> In former times whenever a Nandi warrior killed an enemy he used to eat a morsel of the dead man's heart to make himself brave.<a href="#note_447" id="noteref_447" name="noteref_447"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">447</span></span></a> The Wagogo of German East Africa do the same thing for the same purpose.<a href="#note_448" id="noteref_448" name="noteref_448"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">448</span></span></a> When Sir Charles M'Carthy was killed by the Ashantees in 1824, it is said that his heart was devoured by the chiefs of the Ashantee army, who hoped by this means to imbibe his courage. His flesh was dried and parcelled out among the lower officers for the same purpose, and his bones were long kept at Coomassie as national fetishes.<a href="#note_449" id="noteref_449" name="noteref_449"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">449</span></span></a> The Amazons of Dahomey used to eat the hearts of foes remarkable for their bravery, in order that some of the intrepidity which animated them might be transfused into the eaters. In former days, if report may be trusted, the hearts of enemies who enjoyed a reputation for sagacity were also eaten, for the Ewe-speaking negro of these regions holds that the heart is the seat of the intellect as well as of courage.<a href="#note_450" id="noteref_450" name="noteref_450"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">450</span></span></a> Among the Yoruba-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast the priests of Ogun, the war-god, usually take out the hearts of human victims, which are then dried, crumbled to powder, mixed with rum, and sold to aspirants after courage, who swallow the mixture in the belief that they thereby absorb the manly virtue of which the heart is supposed to be the seat.<a href="#note_451" id="noteref_451" name="noteref_451"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">451</span></span></a> Similarly, Indians of the Orinoco region used to toast the hearts of their enemies, grind them to powder, and then drink the powder in a liquid in order to be brave and valiant the next time they went forth to fight.<a href="#note_452" id="noteref_452" name="noteref_452"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">452</span></span></a> The Nauras Indians of New Granada ate the hearts of Spaniards when they had the opportunity, hoping thereby to make themselves as dauntless as the dreaded Castilian chivalry.<a href="#note_453" id="noteref_453" name="noteref_453"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">453</span></span></a> The Sioux Indians of North America used to reduce to powder the heart of a valiant enemy and swallow the powder, hoping thus to appropriate the dead man's valour.<a href="#note_454" id="noteref_454" name="noteref_454"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">454</span></span></a> The Muskoghees also thought that to eat the heart of a foe would <span class="tei tei-q">“communicate and give greater heart against the enemy. They also think that the vigorous faculties of the mind are derived from the brain, on which account, I have seen some of their heroes drink out of a human skull; they imagine, they only imbibe the good qualities it formerly contained.”</span><a href="#note_455" id="noteref_455" name="noteref_455"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">455</span></span></a> For a similar reason in Uganda a priest used to drink beer out of the skull of a dead king in order that he might be possessed by the king's spirit.<a href="#note_456" id="noteref_456" name="noteref_456"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">456</span></span></a> Among the Esquimaux of Bering Strait, when young men had slain an enemy for the first time in war, they were wont to drink some of the blood and to eat a small piece of the heart of their victim in order to increase their bravery.<a href="#note_457" id="noteref_457" name="noteref_457"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">457</span></span></a> In some tribes of North-Western Australia, when a man dies who had been a great warrior or hunter, his friends cut out the fat about his heart and eat it, because they believe that it imparts to them the courage and cunning of the deceased.<a href="#note_458" id="noteref_458" name="noteref_458"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">458</span></span></a></p>
				<p>But while the human heart is thus commonly eaten for the sake of imbuing the eater with the qualities of its original owner, it is not, as we have already seen, the only part of the body which is consumed for this purpose. Thus in New Caledonia the victors in a fight used to eat the bodies of the slain, <span class="tei tei-q">“not, as might be supposed, from a taste for human flesh, but in order to assimilate part of the bravery which the deceased was supposed to possess.”</span><a href="#note_459" id="noteref_459" name="noteref_459"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">459</span></span></a> Among the tribes about Maryborough in Queensland, when a man was killed in a ceremonial fight, it was customary for his friends to skin and eat him, in order that his warlike virtues might pass into the eaters.<a href="#note_460" id="noteref_460" name="noteref_460"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">460</span></span></a> Warriors of the Theddora and Ngarigo tribes in South-Eastern Australia used to eat the hands and feet of their slain enemies, believing that in this way they acquired some of the qualities and courage of the dead.<a href="#note_461" id="noteref_461" name="noteref_461"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">461</span></span></a> In the Dieri tribe of Central Australia, when a man had been condemned and killed by a properly constituted party of executioners, the weapons with which the deed was done were washed in a small wooden vessel, and the bloody mixture was administered to all the slayers in a prescribed manner, while they lay down on their backs and the elders poured it into their mouths. This was believed to give them double strength, courage, and great nerve for any future enterprise.<a href="#note_462" id="noteref_462" name="noteref_462"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">462</span></span></a> The Kamilaroi of New South Wales ate the liver as well as the heart of a brave man to get his courage.<a href="#note_463" id="noteref_463" name="noteref_463"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">463</span></span></a> In Tonquin also there is a popular superstition that the liver of a brave man makes brave any who partake of it. Hence when a Catholic missionary was beheaded in Tonquin in 1837, the executioner cut out the liver of his victim and ate part of it, while a soldier attempted to devour another part of it raw.<a href="#note_464" id="noteref_464" name="noteref_464"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">464</span></span></a> With a like intent the Chinese swallow the bile of notorious bandits who have been executed.<a href="#note_465" id="noteref_465" name="noteref_465"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">465</span></span></a> The Dyaks of Sarawak used to eat the palms of the hands and the flesh of the knees of the slain in order to steady their own hands and strengthen their own knees.<a href="#note_466" id="noteref_466" name="noteref_466"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">466</span></span></a> The Tolalaki, notorious head-hunters of Central Celebes, drink the blood and eat the brains of their victims that they may become brave.<a href="#note_467" id="noteref_467" name="noteref_467"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">467</span></span></a> The Italones of the Philippine Islands drink the blood of their slain enemies, and eat part of the back of their heads and of their entrails raw to acquire their courage. For the same reason the Efugaos, another tribe of the Philippines, suck the brains of their foes.<a href="#note_468" id="noteref_468" name="noteref_468"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">468</span></span></a> In like manner the Kai of German New Guinea eat the brains of the enemies they kill in order to acquire their strength.<a href="#note_469" id="noteref_469" name="noteref_469"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">469</span></span></a> Among the Kimbunda of Western Africa, when a new king succeeds to the throne, a brave prisoner of war is killed in order that the king and nobles may eat his flesh, and so acquire his strength and courage.<a href="#note_470" id="noteref_470" name="noteref_470"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">470</span></span></a> The notorious Zulu chief Matuana drank the gall of thirty chiefs, whose people he had destroyed, in the belief that it would make him strong.<a href="#note_471" id="noteref_471" name="noteref_471"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">471</span></span></a> It is a Zulu fancy that by eating the centre of the forehead and the eyebrow of an enemy they acquire the power of looking steadfastly at a foe.<a href="#note_472" id="noteref_472" name="noteref_472"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">472</span></span></a> In Tud or Warrior Island, Torres Straits, men would drink the sweat of renowned warriors, and eat the scrapings from their finger-nails which had become coated and sodden with human blood. This was done <span class="tei tei-q">“to make strong and like stone; no afraid.”</span><a href="#note_473" id="noteref_473" name="noteref_473"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">473</span></span></a> In Nagir, another island of Torres Straits, in order to infuse courage into boys a warrior used to take the eye and tongue of a man whom he had killed, and after mincing them and mixing them with his urine he administered the compound to the boy, who received it with shut eyes and open mouth seated between the warrior's legs.<a href="#note_474" id="noteref_474" name="noteref_474"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">474</span></span></a> Before every warlike expedition the people of Minahassa in Celebes used to take the locks of hair of a slain foe and dabble them in boiling water to extract the courage; this infusion of bravery was then drunk by the warriors.<a href="#note_475" id="noteref_475" name="noteref_475"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">475</span></span></a> In New Zealand <span class="tei tei-q">“the chief was an <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">atua</span></span> [god], but there were powerful and powerless gods; each naturally sought to make himself one of the former; the plan therefore adopted was to incorporate the spirits of others with their own; thus, when a warrior slew a chief, he immediately gouged out his eyes and swallowed them, the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">atua tonga</span></span>, or divinity, being supposed to reside in that organ; thus he not only killed the body, but also possessed himself of the soul of his enemy, and consequently the more chiefs he slew the greater did his divinity become.”</span><a href="#note_476" id="noteref_476" name="noteref_476"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">476</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Even without absorbing any part of a man's bodily substance it is sometimes thought possible to acquire his moral virtues through simple contact with his bones. Thus among the Toradjas of Central Celebes, when a youth is being circumcised he is made to sit on the skull of a slain foe in order to make him brave in war;<a href="#note_477" id="noteref_477" name="noteref_477"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">477</span></span></a> and when Scanderbeg, Prince of Epirus, was dead, the Turks, who had often felt the force of his arm in battle, are said to have imagined that by wearing a piece of his bones near their heart they should be animated with a strength and valour like his.<a href="#note_478" id="noteref_478" name="noteref_478"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">478</span></span></a> A peculiar form of communion with the dead is practised by the Gallas of Eastern Africa. They think that food from the house of a dead man, especially food that he liked, or that he cooked for himself, contains a portion of his life or soul. If at the funeral feast a man eats some of that food, he fancies that he has thereby absorbed some of the life or soul of the departed, a portion of his spirit, intelligence, or courage.<a href="#note_479" id="noteref_479" name="noteref_479"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">479</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Strange as it may seem to us, one motive which induces a savage warrior to eat the flesh or drink the blood of the foe whom he has slain appears to be a wish to form an indissoluble covenant of friendship and brotherhood with his victim. For it is a widespread belief among savages that by transfusing a little of their blood into each other's bodies two men become kinsmen and allies; the same blood now circulating in the veins of both, neither can injure the other without at the same time injuring himself; the two have therefore given each other the strongest bond, the best possible hostages, for their good behaviour.<a href="#note_480" id="noteref_480" name="noteref_480"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">480</span></span></a> Acting on this theory, the primitive warrior seeks to convert his slain foe into the firmest of friends by imbibing the dead man's blood or swallowing his flesh. That at all events appears to be the idea at the root of the following customs. When an Arawak Indian of British Guiana has murdered another, he repairs on the third night to the grave of his victim, and pressing a pointed stick through the corpse he licks off and swallows any blood that he finds adhering to the stick. For he believes that if he did not taste his victim's blood, he would go mad and die; whereas by swallowing the blood he averts any ill consequences that might flow to him from the murder.<a href="#note_481" id="noteref_481" name="noteref_481"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">481</span></span></a> The belief and practice of the Nandi are similar: <span class="tei tei-q">“To the present day, when a person of another tribe has been slain by a Nandi, the blood must be carefully washed off the spear or sword into a cup made of grass, and drunk by the slayer. If this is not done it is thought that the man will become frenzied.”</span><a href="#note_482" id="noteref_482" name="noteref_482"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">482</span></span></a> So among the tribes of the Lower Niger <span class="tei tei-q">“it is customary and necessary for the executioner to lick the blood that is on the blade”</span>; moreover, <span class="tei tei-q">“the custom of licking the blood off the blade of a sword by which a man has been killed in war is common to all these tribes, and the explanation given me by the Ibo, which is generally accepted, is, that if this was not done, the act of killing would so affect the strikers as to cause them to run amok among their own people; because the sight and smell of blood render them absolutely senseless as well as regardless of all consequences. And this licking the blood is the only sure remedy, and the only way in which they can recover themselves.”</span><a href="#note_483" id="noteref_483" name="noteref_483"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">483</span></span></a> Among the Shans executioners believe that they would soon fall ill and die if they did not taste the blood of their victims.<a href="#note_484" id="noteref_484" name="noteref_484"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">484</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The most probable explanation of these practices seems to be that a manslayer is thought to be driven mad by the ghost of his victim, who takes possession of his murderer's body and causes him to demean himself in a frantic manner; whereas, as soon as the slayer has tasted the blood of the slain, he becomes a blood-brother of his victim, whose ghost accordingly will do him no harm.<a href="#note_485" id="noteref_485" name="noteref_485"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">485</span></span></a> This hypothesis is strongly confirmed by the reason alleged for a similar custom formerly observed by the Maoris. When a warrior had slain his foe in combat, he tasted his blood, believing that this preserved him from the avenging spirit of his victim; for they imagined that <span class="tei tei-q">“the moment a slayer had tasted the blood of the slain, the dead man became a part of his being and placed him under the protection of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">atua</span></span> or guardian-spirit of the deceased.”</span><a href="#note_486" id="noteref_486" name="noteref_486"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">486</span></span></a> In the light of these facts we can now explain the opinion, still widely held in Calabria, that if a murderer is to escape, he must suck his victim's blood from the reeking blade of the dagger with which he did the deed;<a href="#note_487" id="noteref_487" name="noteref_487"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">487</span></span></a> and, further, we can see at least a glimmering of reason, however misapplied, in the confidence cherished by the Botocudos of Brazil, that if only they ate a morsel of the flesh of their enemies, the arrows of the fellow tribesmen of the slain would not be able to hit them.<a href="#note_488" id="noteref_488" name="noteref_488"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">488</span></span></a> Indeed the evidence which I have just adduced suggests that the intention of forming a blood-covenant with the dead may have been a common motive for the cannibalism which has been so often practised by savage victors on the bodies of their victims.<a href="#note_489" id="noteref_489" name="noteref_489"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">489</span></span></a> If that was so, it would to some extent mitigate the horror with which such a practice is naturally viewed by civilised observers; since it would reveal the cannibal feast, no longer in the lurid light of a brutal outburst of blind rage and hatred against the vanquished, but in the milder aspect of a solemn rite designed to wipe out the memory of past hostilities and to establish a permanent relation of friendship and good fellowship with the dead.</p>
				<p>Another mode of entering into communion with the dead by means of their bodily relics is to grind their bones to powder or to burn them to ashes, and then to swallow the powder or the ashes mixed with food or drink. This method of absorbing the virtues or appropriating the souls of deceased kinsfolk has been practised by a number of Indian tribes of South America. Thus the Tarianas, Tucanos, and other tribes in the valley of the Amazon, about a month after the funeral, disinter the corpse, which is then much decomposed, and put it in a great pan or oven over the fire till all the volatile parts are driven off with a most horrible stench, leaving only a black carbonaceous paste. This paste is then pounded into a fine powder, and being mixed in several large vats of the native beer, the liquor is drunk by the assembled company until all is consumed. They believe that thus the virtues of the deceased are transmitted to the drinkers.<a href="#note_490" id="noteref_490" name="noteref_490"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">490</span></span></a> Similarly among the Xomanas and Passes of the Rio Negro and Japura River in Brazil, it was customary to burn the bones of the dead and mingle the ashes in their drink; <span class="tei tei-q">“for they fancied, that by this means they received into their own bodies the spirits of their deceased friends.”</span><a href="#note_491" id="noteref_491" name="noteref_491"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">491</span></span></a> We may suppose that a similar motive underlies the custom wherever it has been observed by the Indians of South America, even when this particular motive is not expressly alleged by our authorities. For example, the Retoroños, Pechuyos, and Guarayos of eastern Bolivia <span class="tei tei-q">“manifested their feeling for the dead by a remarkable custom: when the body had mouldered they dug up the bones, reduced them to powder, and mingling it with maize, composed a sort of cake, which they considered it the strongest mark of friendship to offer and partake. Some of the first missionaries were regaled with this family bread, before they knew what they were eating.”</span><a href="#note_492" id="noteref_492" name="noteref_492"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">492</span></span></a> Again, in the province of Coro, in north-western Venezuela, when a chief died, they lamented him in the night, celebrating his actions; then they parched his body at the fire, and reducing it to powder drank it up in their liquor, deeming this act the highest honour they could pay him.<a href="#note_493" id="noteref_493" name="noteref_493"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">493</span></span></a> The Tauaré Indians of the Rio Enivra burn their dead, keep their ashes in hollow reeds, and eat a portion of the ashes with every meal.<a href="#note_494" id="noteref_494" name="noteref_494"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">494</span></span></a> So in antiquity Artemisia expressed her love and grief for her dead husband Mausolus by powdering his ashes and drinking them in water.<a href="#note_495" id="noteref_495" name="noteref_495"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">495</span></span></a> It is said that Mwamba, a recent king or chief of the Wemba in Northern Rhodesia, having detected one of his wives in an intrigue with another man, caused the guilty pair to be burned alive, while he watched their tortures from a raised seat. <span class="tei tei-q">“Shortly after this, however, he would seem to have been stricken with remorse and the dread of Nemesis. The presiding witch-doctor was therefore ordered to collect the ashes of the twain, and decoct therefrom a potion, which was administered to the king to avert the avenging furies of evil spirits of the murdered pair, which might otherwise have hounded him into a fit of madness.”</span><a href="#note_496" id="noteref_496" name="noteref_496"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">496</span></span></a> By drinking the ashes of his victims the king sought to identify himself with them and so to protect himself against their angry ghosts, just as we have seen that manslayers seek to protect themselves against the ghosts of their victims by drinking their blood.<a href="#note_497" id="noteref_497" name="noteref_497"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">497</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Just as the savage thinks that he can swallow the moral and other virtues in the shape of food, so he fondly imagines that he can inoculate himself with them. Here in Europe we as yet inoculate only against disease; in Basutoland they have learned the art of inoculating not merely against disease but against moral evil and public calamity, against wild beasts and winter cold. For example, if an epidemic is raging, if public affairs go ill, or war threatens to break out, the chief, with paternal solicitude, seeks to guard his people against the evils that menace them by inoculating them with his own hand. Armed with a lancet, he makes a slight incision in the temples of each one, and rubs into the wound a pinch of magic powder which has been carefully compounded of the ashes of certain plants and animals. The plants and animals whose ashes compose this sovereign medicine are always symbolical; in other words, they are supposed to be imbued with the virtues which the chief desires to impart to his people. They consist, for example, of plants whose foliage withstands the rigours of winter; mimosas, whose thorns present an impenetrable barrier to all animals of the deer kind; the claws or a few hairs from the mane of a lion, the bravest of beasts; the tuft of hair round the root of the horns of a bull, which is the emblem of strength and fecundity; the skin of a serpent; the feathers of a kite or a hawk.<a href="#note_498" id="noteref_498" name="noteref_498"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">498</span></span></a> So when the Barotsé wish to be swift of foot, to cripple the fleeing game, and to ensure an abundant catch, they scarify their arms and legs and rub into the wounds a powder made of the burnt bones of various beasts and birds.<a href="#note_499" id="noteref_499" name="noteref_499"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">499</span></span></a> Among some tribes of South-Eastern Africa the same magic powder which is made from various parts of slain foes, and is eaten by boys at circumcision,<a href="#note_500" id="noteref_500" name="noteref_500"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">500</span></span></a> is used to inoculate the fighting-men in time of war. The medicine-man makes an incision in the forehead of each warrior, and puts the powder into the cut, thus infusing strength and courage for the battle.<a href="#note_501" id="noteref_501" name="noteref_501"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">501</span></span></a> Among some Caffre tribes the powdered charcoal with which the warriors are thus inoculated in various parts of their bodies is procured by burning the flesh of a live ox with a certain kind of wood or roots, to which magic virtue is attributed.<a href="#note_502" id="noteref_502" name="noteref_502"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">502</span></span></a> The Basutos think that they can render themselves invulnerable by inoculation,<a href="#note_503" id="noteref_503" name="noteref_503"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">503</span></span></a> and the Zulus imagine that they can protect themselves against snake-bite by similar means. But the saving virtue of the inoculation is not permanent; like vaccination, it has to be periodically renewed. Hence every year, about October, Zulu men, women, and children have a small piece of skin cut from the back of the left hand, and the poison of a snake, mixed with spittle, is rubbed into the wound. No snake will ever approach a man who has thus been inoculated; and what is even more curious, if the shadow of an inoculated man should touch the shadow of a man who has not been inoculated, the latter will fall down as if he had been shot, overcome by the poison transmitted through the shadow: so exceedingly virulent is the virus.<a href="#note_504" id="noteref_504" name="noteref_504"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">504</span></span></a> Among the Jukos, a tribe of the Benue River in Northern Nigeria, before a hunter goes forth to hunt elephants, he makes four cuts in his left arm and rubs in <span class="tei tei-q">“medicine”</span>; this helps him to see the beast next day.<a href="#note_505" id="noteref_505" name="noteref_505"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">505</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Again, the Zulus know how to inoculate themselves not merely with moral virtue, but even with celestial power. For you must know that the Zulus have heaven-herds or sky-herds, who drive away clouds big with hail and lightning, just as herdsmen drive cattle before them. These heaven-herds are in sympathy with the heaven. For when the heaven is about to be darkened, and before the clouds appear or the thunder mutters, the heart of the heaven-herd feels it coming, for it is hot within him and he is excited by anger. When the sky begins to be overcast, he too grows dark like it; when it thunders, he frowns, that his face may be black as the scowl of the angry heaven. Now the way in which he thus becomes sympathetic with all the changing moods of the inconstant heaven is this: he eats the heaven and scarifies himself with it. And the way in which he eats the heaven and scarifies himself with it is as follows. When a bullock is struck by lightning, the wizard takes its flesh and puts it in a sherd and eats it while it is hot, mixed with medicine; and thus he eats the heaven by eating the flesh, which came from the beast, which was struck by the lightning, which came down from the heaven. And in like manner he scarifies himself with the heaven, for he makes cuts in his body and rubs in medicine mixed with the flesh of a bullock that was struck by lightning.<a href="#note_506" id="noteref_506" name="noteref_506"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">506</span></span></a> In some Caffre tribes, when an animal or a man has been struck by lightning, the priest comes straightway and vaccinates every person in the kraal, apparently as a sort of insurance against lightning. He sets to work by tying a number of charms round the neck of every man and woman in the village, in order that they may have power to dig the dead man's grave; for in these tribes beasts and men alike that have been struck by lightning are always buried, and the flesh is never eaten. Next a sacrificial beast is killed and a fire kindled, in which certain magic woods or roots are burned to charcoal, and then ground to powder. The priest thereupon makes incisions in various parts of the bodies of each inmate of the kraal, and rubs a portion of the powdered charcoal into the cuts; the rest of the powder he mixes with sour milk, and gives to them all to drink. From the time the lightning strikes the kraal until this ceremony has been performed, the people are obliged to abstain entirely from the use of milk. Their heads are then shaved. Should a house have been struck by lightning it must be abandoned, with everything in it. Until all these rites have been performed, none of the people may leave the kraal or have any intercourse whatever with others; but when the ceremonies have been duly performed, the people are pronounced clean, and may again associate with their neighbours. However, for some months afterwards none of the livestock of the kraal and few other things belonging to it are allowed to pass into other hands, whether by way of sale or of gift.<a href="#note_507" id="noteref_507" name="noteref_507"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">507</span></span></a> Hence it would appear that all persons in a village which has been struck by lightning are supposed to be infected with a dangerous virus, which they might communicate to their neighbours; and the vaccination is intended to disinfect them as well as to protect them against the recurrence of a like calamity. Young Carib warriors used to be inoculated for the purpose of making them brave and hardy. Some time before the ceremony the lad who was to be operated on caught a bird of prey of a particular sort and kept it in captivity till the day appointed. When the time was come and friends had assembled to witness the ceremony, the father of the boy seized the bird by its legs and crushed its head by beating it on the head of his son, who dared not wince under the rain of blows that nearly stunned him. Next the father bruised and pounded the bird's flesh, and steeped it in water together with a certain spice; after which he scored and slashed his son's body in all directions, washed his wounds with the decoction, and gave him the bird's heart to eat, in order, as it was said, that he might be the braver for it.<a href="#note_508" id="noteref_508" name="noteref_508"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">508</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It is not always deemed necessary either that the mystical substance should be swallowed by the communicant, or that he should receive it by the more painful process of scarification and inoculation. Sometimes it is thought enough merely to smear or anoint him with it. Among some of the Australian blacks it used to be a common practice to kill a man, cut out his caul-fat, and rub themselves with it, in the belief that all the qualities, both physical and mental, which had distinguished the original owner of the fat, were thus communicated by its means to the person who greased himself with it.<a href="#note_509" id="noteref_509" name="noteref_509"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">509</span></span></a> The Kamilaroi tribe of New South Wales sometimes deposited their dead on the forks of trees, and lighting fires underneath caught the fat as it dropped; for they hoped with the droppings to acquire the strength and courage of the deceased.<a href="#note_510" id="noteref_510" name="noteref_510"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">510</span></span></a> The Wollaroi, another tribe of New South Wales, used to place the dead on a stage, and the mourners sat under it and rubbed their bodies with the juices of putrefaction which exuded from the rotten body, believing that this made them strong. Others collected these juices in vessels, and the young men rubbed the stinking liquid into their persons in order to acquire the good qualities of the departed.<a href="#note_511" id="noteref_511" name="noteref_511"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">511</span></span></a> Wherever a like custom has been practised, as it has been, for example, by some of the natives of New Guinea, Timor Laut, and Madagascar,<a href="#note_512" id="noteref_512" name="noteref_512"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">512</span></span></a> we may conjecture that the motive has been similar. Again, the negroes of Southern Guinea regard the brain as the seat of wisdom, and think it a pity that, when a wise man dies, his brain and his wisdom should go to waste together. So they sever his head from his body and hang it up over a mass of chalk, which, as the head decays, receives the drippings of brain and wisdom. Any one who applies the precious dripping to his forehead is supposed to absorb thereby the intelligence of the dead.<a href="#note_513" id="noteref_513" name="noteref_513"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">513</span></span></a> Among the Beku, a tribe of dwarfs attached to the Fans in West Africa, the great charm for success in hunting is procured by killing a man and afterwards, when the corpse has begun to moulder in the grave, detaching the head from the body. The brain, heart, eyes and hairs of the body are then removed and mixed, according to a secret formula, with special incantations. When the compound is dry, the hunter rubs himself with it <span class="tei tei-q">“in order to acquire a dash of the higher power with which people are endowed in the other life, and in particular their invisibility.”</span><a href="#note_514" id="noteref_514" name="noteref_514"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">514</span></span></a> Among the Digger Indians of California, when a man died, it was customary to burn the body to ashes, mix the ashes with a thick resinous gum extracted from a pine-tree, and then smear the gum on the head of the mourner, where it was allowed to remain till it gradually wore away.<a href="#note_515" id="noteref_515" name="noteref_515"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">515</span></span></a> The motive for the custom is not mentioned, but it was probably, like the motive for the parallel custom of swallowing the ashes of the dead, a desire to participate in the powers and virtues of the departed. At a certain stage of the ceremonies by which, in the Andaman Islands, a boy is initiated into manhood, the chief takes the carcase of a boar and presses it heavily down on the shoulders, back, and limbs of the young man as he sits, silent and motionless, on the ground. This is done to make him brave and strong. Afterwards the animal is cut up, and its melted fat is poured over the novice, and rubbed into his body.<a href="#note_516" id="noteref_516" name="noteref_516"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">516</span></span></a> The Arabs of Eastern Africa believe that an unguent of lion's fat inspires a man with boldness, and makes the wild beasts flee in terror before him.<a href="#note_517" id="noteref_517" name="noteref_517"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">517</span></span></a> In the forests of North-western Brazil there lives a small falcon with a red beak which is so sharp-sighted that it can detect even a worm on the ground from a considerable height. When a Kobeua Indian has killed one of these birds, he pokes out its eyes and allows the fluid to drip into his own, believing that in this way they will be sharp-sighted like those of the falcon.<a href="#note_518" id="noteref_518" name="noteref_518"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">518</span></span></a> Most of the Baperis, or Malekootoos, a Bechuana tribe of South Africa, revere or, as they say, sing the porcupine, which seems to be their totem, as the sun is the totem of some members of the tribe, and a species of ape the totem of others. Those of them who have the porcupine for their totem swear by the animal, and lament if any one injures it. When a porcupine has been killed, they religiously gather up its bristles, spit on them, and rub their eyebrows with them, saying, <span class="tei tei-q">“They have slain our brother, our master, one of ourselves, him whom we sing.”</span> They would fear to die if they ate of its flesh. Nevertheless they esteem it wholesome for an infant of the clan to rub into his joints certain portions of the paunch of the animal mixed with the sap of some plants to which they ascribe an occult virtue.<a href="#note_519" id="noteref_519" name="noteref_519"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">519</span></span></a> So at the solemn ceremony which is observed by the Central Australian tribes for the purpose of multiplying kangaroos, men of the kangaroo totem not only eat a little kangaroo flesh as a sacrament, but also have their bodies anointed with kangaroo fat. Doubtless the intention alike of the eating and of the anointing is to impart to the man the qualities of his totem animal, and thus to enable him to perform the ceremonies for the multiplication of the breed.<a href="#note_520" id="noteref_520" name="noteref_520"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">520</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In ancient Mexico the priests of the god Tezcatlipoca, before they engaged in religious rites which tried the nerve, used to smear their bodies with a magic ointment, which had the effect of banishing all fear, so that they would confront wild beasts in their dens or slaughter people in sacrifice with the utmost indifference. The ointment which had this marvellous property was compounded of the ashes of venomous reptiles and insects, such as spiders, scorpions, centipedes, and vipers, which were brayed up in a mortar along with living specimens of the same creatures, tobacco, soot, and the ashes of black caterpillars. This precious substance was then set before the god in little pots, because they said it was his victuals; therefore they called it a divine food. And when the priests had besmeared themselves with it, they were ready to discharge the duties of their holy office by butchering their fellow men in the human shambles without one qualm of fear or one visiting of compassion. Moreover, an unction of this ointment was deemed a sovereign remedy for sickness and disease; hence they named it <span class="tei tei-q">“the divine physic”</span>; and sick people came from all quarters to the priests, as to their saviours, to have their ailing parts anointed with the divine physic and to be made whole.<a href="#note_521" id="noteref_521" name="noteref_521"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">521</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Sometimes the valuable qualities of an animal or of a person may be imparted to another by the more delicate and ethereal process of fumigation. This refined mode of cultivating the moral virtues is or used to be practised by the Caffres of South Africa. Thus in former times as soon as a baby was born, some dirt was scraped from the forearm and other parts of the father's body and mixed with special medicines. The mixture was then made to smoulder and the baby was fumigated or <span class="tei tei-q">“washed”</span> in the smoke. This ceremony was deemed of great importance, being the established way of communicating to the child a portion of the ancestral spirit (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">itongo</span></span>) through the physical medium of the father's dirt, to which the spirit naturally adheres. But while the dirt was endowed with this spiritual potency, the moral character of the infant depended in a large measure on the nature of the medicines with which the dirt was compounded, and accordingly much thought and skill were devoted to their selection and preparation. Foremost among the ingredients was a meteorite, burnt to a cinder and ground to powder. The effect of this powder, well mixed with the dirt, and introduced into the orifices of the child's body by means of smoke, is to close the anterior fontanelle of the baby's skull, to strengthen the bones of that important part of his person, to communicate vigour to his mind and courage to his disposition, and in general to brace and harden his whole system with the strength and hardness of the meteorite. Other ingredients which have a most beneficial effect are the powdered whiskers of a leopard, the claws of a lion, and the skin of a salamander. The mode of administering the medicine is as follows. You set fire to the compound, and while it smoulders, you hold the infant, wrapt up in a blanket, over the burning mass so as to compel it to inhale the smoke. To make sure of producing the desired effect, some of the powdered medicine is mixed with the baby's food.<a href="#note_522" id="noteref_522" name="noteref_522"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">522</span></span></a> In like manner by holding the smouldering feather of a vulture under a baby's nose you render the child valiant and brave like a vulture, and if you do the same with a peacock's feather, your offspring will be, like a peacock, impavid and never dismayed by thunder or other terrible noises.<a href="#note_523" id="noteref_523" name="noteref_523"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">523</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It is now easy to understand why a savage should desire to partake of the flesh of an animal or man whom he regards as divine. By eating the body of the god he shares in the god's attributes and powers. And when the god is a corn-god, the corn is his proper body; when he is a vine-god, the juice of the grape is his blood; and so by eating the bread and drinking the wine the worshipper partakes of the real body and blood of his god. Thus the drinking of wine in the rites of a vine-god like Dionysus is not an act of revelry, it is a solemn sacrament.<a href="#note_524" id="noteref_524" name="noteref_524"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">524</span></span></a> Yet a time comes when reasonable men find it hard to understand how any one in his senses can suppose that by eating bread or drinking wine he consumes the body or blood of a deity. <span class="tei tei-q">“When we call corn Ceres and wine Bacchus,”</span> says Cicero, <span class="tei tei-q">“we use a common figure of speech; but do you imagine that anybody is so insane as to believe that the thing he feeds upon is a god?”</span><a href="#note_525" id="noteref_525" name="noteref_525"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">525</span></span></a> In writing thus the Roman philosopher little foresaw that in Rome itself, and in the countries which have derived their creed from her, the belief which he here stigmatises as insane was destined to persist for thousands of years, as a cardinal doctrine of religion, among peoples who pride themselves on their religious enlightenment by comparison with the blind superstitions of pagan antiquity. So little can even the greatest minds of one generation foresee the devious track which the religious faith of mankind will pursue in after ages.</p>
			</div>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
