<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter IX. Ancient Deities of Vegetation as Animals.</span>
				</h1>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 1. Dionysus, the Goat and the Bull.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>However we may explain it, the fact remains that in peasant folk-lore the corn-spirit is very commonly conceived and represented in animal form. May not this fact explain the relation in which certain animals stood to the ancient deities of vegetation, Dionysus, Demeter, Adonis, Attis, and Osiris?</p>
					<p>To begin with Dionysus. We have seen that he was represented sometimes as a goat and sometimes as a bull.<a href="#note_1" id="noteref_1" name="noteref_1"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">1</span></span></a> As a goat he can hardly be separated from the minor divinities, the Pans, Satyrs, and Silenuses, all of whom are closely associated with him and are represented more or less completely in the form of goats. Thus, Pan was regularly portrayed in sculpture and painting with the face and legs of a goat.<a href="#note_2" id="noteref_2" name="noteref_2"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">2</span></span></a> The Satyrs were depicted with pointed goat-ears, and sometimes with sprouting horns and short tails.<a href="#note_3" id="noteref_3" name="noteref_3"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">3</span></span></a> They were sometimes spoken of simply as goats;<a href="#note_4" id="noteref_4" name="noteref_4"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">4</span></span></a> and in the drama their parts were played by men dressed in goatskins.<a href="#note_5" id="noteref_5" name="noteref_5"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">5</span></span></a> Silenus is represented in art clad in a goatskin.<a href="#note_6" id="noteref_6" name="noteref_6"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">6</span></span></a> Further, the Fauns, the Italian counterpart of the Greek Pans and Satyrs, are described as being half goats, with goat-feet and goat-horns.<a href="#note_7" id="noteref_7" name="noteref_7"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">7</span></span></a> Again, all these minor goat-formed divinities partake more or less clearly of the character of woodland deities. Thus, Pan was called by the Arcadians the Lord of the Wood.<a href="#note_8" id="noteref_8" name="noteref_8"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">8</span></span></a> The Silenuses associated with the tree-nymphs.<a href="#note_9" id="noteref_9" name="noteref_9"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">9</span></span></a> The Fauns are expressly designated as woodland deities;<a href="#note_10" id="noteref_10" name="noteref_10"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">10</span></span></a> and their character as such is still further brought out by their association, or even identification, with Silvanus and the Silvanuses, who, as their name of itself indicates, are spirits of the woods.<a href="#note_11" id="noteref_11" name="noteref_11"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">11</span></span></a> Lastly, the association of the Satyrs with the Silenuses, Fauns, and Silvanuses,<a href="#note_12" id="noteref_12" name="noteref_12"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">12</span></span></a> proves that the Satyrs also were woodland deities. These goat-formed spirits of the woods have their counterparts in the folk-lore of Northern Europe. Thus, the Russian wood-spirits, called <i xml:lang="ru">Ljeschie</i> (from <i xml:lang="ru">ljes</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“wood”</span>) are believed to appear partly in human shape, but with the horns, ears, and legs of goats. The <i xml:lang="ru">Ljeschi</i> can alter his stature at pleasure; when he walks in the wood he is as tall as the trees; when he walks in the meadows he is no higher than the grass. Some of the <i xml:lang="ru">Ljeschie</i> are spirits of the corn as well as of the wood; before harvest they are as tall as the corn-stalks, but after it they shrink to the height of the stubble.<a href="#note_13" id="noteref_13" name="noteref_13"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">13</span></span></a> This brings out—what we have remarked before—the close connexion between tree-spirits and corn-spirits, and shews how easily the former may melt into the latter. Similarly the Fauns, though wood-spirits, were believed to foster the growth of the crops.<a href="#note_14" id="noteref_14" name="noteref_14"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">14</span></span></a> We have already seen how often the corn-spirit is represented in folk-custom as a goat.<a href="#note_15" id="noteref_15" name="noteref_15"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">15</span></span></a> On the whole, then, as Mannhardt argues,<a href="#note_16" id="noteref_16" name="noteref_16"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">16</span></span></a> the Pans, Satyrs, and Fauns perhaps belong to a widely diffused class of wood-spirits conceived in goat-form. The fondness of goats for straying in woods and nibbling the bark of trees, to which indeed they are most destructive, is an obvious and perhaps sufficient reason why wood-spirits should so often be supposed to take the form of goats. The inconsistency of a god of vegetation subsisting upon the vegetation which he personifies is not one to strike the primitive mind. Such inconsistencies arise when the deity, ceasing to be immanent in the vegetation, comes to be regarded as its owner or lord; for the idea of owning the vegetation naturally leads to that of subsisting on it. We have already seen that the corn-spirit, originally conceived as immanent in the corn, afterwards comes to be regarded as its owner, who lives on it and is reduced to poverty and want by being deprived of it.<a href="#note_17" id="noteref_17" name="noteref_17"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">17</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Thus the representation of wood-spirits in the form of goats appears to be both widespread and, to the primitive mind, natural. Therefore when we find, as we have done, that Dionysus—a tree-god—is sometimes represented in goat-form,<a href="#note_18" id="noteref_18" name="noteref_18"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">18</span></span></a> we can hardly avoid concluding that this representation is simply a part of his proper character as a tree-god and is not to be explained by the fusion of two distinct and independent worships, in one of which he originally appeared as a tree-god and in the other as a goat. If such a fusion took place in the case of Dionysus, it must equally have taken place in the case of the Pans and Satyrs of Greece, the Fauns of Italy, and the <i xml:lang="ru">Ljeschie</i> of Russia. That such a fusion of two wholly disconnected worships should have occurred once is possible; that it should have occurred twice independently is improbable; that it should have occurred thrice independently is so unlikely as to be practically incredible.</p>
					<p>Dionysus was also figured, as we have seen,<a href="#note_19" id="noteref_19" name="noteref_19"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">19</span></span></a> in the shape of a bull. After what has gone before we are naturally led to expect that his bull form must have been only another expression for his character as a deity of vegetation, especially as the bull is a common embodiment of the corn-spirit in Northern Europe;<a href="#note_20" id="noteref_20" name="noteref_20"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">20</span></span></a> and the close association of Dionysus with Demeter and Persephone in the mysteries of Eleusis shews that he had at least strong agricultural affinities. The other possible explanation of the bull-shaped Dionysus would be that the conception of him as a bull was originally entirely distinct from the conception of him as a deity of vegetation, and that the fusion of the two conceptions was due to some such circumstance as the union of two tribes, one of which had previously worshipped a bull-god and the other a tree-god. This appears to be the view taken by Mr. Andrew Lang, who suggests that the bull-formed Dionysus <span class="tei tei-q">“had either been developed out of, or had succeeded to, the worship of a bull-totem.”</span><a href="#note_21" id="noteref_21" name="noteref_21"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">21</span></span></a> Of course this is possible. But it is not yet certain that the Aryans ever had totemism.<a href="#note_22" id="noteref_22" name="noteref_22"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">22</span></span></a> On the other hand, it is quite certain that many Aryan peoples have conceived deities of vegetation as embodied in animal forms. Therefore when we find amongst an Aryan people like the Greeks a deity of vegetation represented as an animal, the presumption must be in favour of explaining this by a principle which is certainly known to have influenced the Aryan race rather than by one which is not certainly known to have done so. In the present state of our knowledge, therefore, it is safer to regard the bull form of Dionysus as being, like his goat form, an expression of his proper character as a deity of vegetation.</p>
					<p>The probability of this view will be somewhat increased if it can be shewn that in other rites than those of Dionysus the ancients slew an ox as a representative of the spirit of vegetation. This they appear to have done in the Athenian sacrifice known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the murder of the ox”</span> (<i xml:lang="el">bouphonia</i>). It took place about the end of June or beginning of July, that is, about the time when the threshing is nearly over in Attica. According to tradition the sacrifice was instituted to procure a cessation of drought and dearth which had afflicted the land. The ritual was as follows. Barley mixed with wheat, or cakes made of them, were laid upon the bronze altar of Zeus Polieus on the Acropolis. Oxen were driven round the altar, and the ox which went up to the altar and ate the offering on it was sacrificed. The axe and knife with which the beast was slain had been previously wetted with water brought by maidens called <span class="tei tei-q">“water-carriers.”</span> The weapons were then sharpened and handed to the butchers, one of whom felled the ox with the axe and another cut its throat with the knife. As soon as he had felled the ox, the former threw the axe from him and fled; and the man who cut the beast's throat apparently imitated his example. Meantime the ox was skinned and all present partook of its flesh. Then the hide was stuffed with straw and sewed up; next the stuffed animal was set on its feet and yoked to a plough as if it were ploughing. A trial then took place in an ancient law-court presided over by the King (as he was called) to determine who had murdered the ox. The maidens who had brought the water accused the men who had sharpened the axe and knife; the men who had sharpened the axe and knife blamed the men who had handed these implements to the butchers; the men who had handed the implements to the butchers blamed the butchers; and the butchers laid the blame on the axe and knife, which were accordingly found guilty, condemned and cast into the sea.<a href="#note_23" id="noteref_23" name="noteref_23"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">23</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The name of this sacrifice,—<span class="tei tei-q">“the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">murder</span></em> of the ox,”</span><a href="#note_24" id="noteref_24" name="noteref_24"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">24</span></span></a>—the pains taken by each person who had a hand in the slaughter to lay the blame on some one else, together with the formal trial and punishment of the axe or knife or both, prove that the ox was here regarded not merely as a victim offered to a god, but as itself a sacred creature, the slaughter of which was sacrilege or murder. This is borne out by a statement of Varro that to kill an ox was formerly a capital crime in Attica.<a href="#note_25" id="noteref_25" name="noteref_25"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">25</span></span></a> The mode of selecting the victim suggests that the ox which tasted the corn was viewed as the corn-deity taking possession of his own. This interpretation is supported by the following custom. In Beauce, in the district of Orleans, on the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth of April they make a straw-man called <span class="tei tei-q">“the great <i xml:lang="fr">mondard</i>.”</span> For they say that the old <i xml:lang="fr">mondard</i> is now dead and it is necessary to make a new one. The straw-man is carried in solemn procession up and down the village and at last is placed upon the oldest apple-tree. There he remains till the apples are gathered, when he is taken down and thrown into the water, or he is burned and his ashes cast into water. But the person who plucks the first fruit from the tree succeeds to the title of <span class="tei tei-q">“the great <i xml:lang="fr">mondard</i>,”</span><a href="#note_26" id="noteref_26" name="noteref_26"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">26</span></span></a> Here the straw figure, called <span class="tei tei-q">“the great <i xml:lang="fr">mondard</i>”</span> and placed on the oldest apple-tree in spring, represents the spirit of the tree, who, dead in winter, revives when the apple-blossoms appear on the boughs. Thus the person who plucks the first fruit from the tree and thereby receives the name of <span class="tei tei-q">“the great <i xml:lang="fr">mondard</i>”</span> must be regarded as a representative of the tree-spirit. Primitive peoples are usually reluctant to taste the annual first-fruits of any crop, until some ceremony has been performed which makes it safe and pious for them to do so. The reason of this reluctance appears to be a belief that the first-fruits either belong to or actually contain a divinity. Therefore when a man or animal is seen boldly to appropriate the sacred first-fruits, he or it is naturally regarded as the divinity himself in human or animal form taking possession of his own. The time of the Athenian sacrifice, which fell about the close of the threshing, suggests that the wheat and barley laid upon the altar were a harvest offering; and the sacramental character of the subsequent repast—all partaking of the flesh of the divine animal—would make it parallel to the harvest-suppers of modern Europe, in which, as we have seen, the flesh of the animal who stands for the corn-spirit is eaten by the harvesters. Again, the tradition that the sacrifice was instituted in order to put an end to drought and famine is in favour of taking it as a harvest festival. The resurrection of the corn-spirit, enacted by setting up the stuffed ox and yoking it to the plough, may be compared with the resurrection of the tree-spirit in the person of his representative, the Wild Man.<a href="#note_27" id="noteref_27" name="noteref_27"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">27</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Still more clearly, perhaps, does the identification of the corn-spirit with an ox come out in the sacrificial ritual which the Greeks of Magnesia on the Maeander observed in honour of Zeus Sosipolis, a god whose title of Sosipolis (<span class="tei tei-q">“Saviour of the City”</span>) marks him as the equivalent of Zeus Polieus (<span class="tei tei-q">“Zeus of the City”</span>). The details of the ritual are happily preserved in an inscription, which records a decree of the council and of the people for the regulation of the whole proceedings. Every year at a festival in the month of Heraeon the magistrates bought the finest bull that could be had for money, and at the new moon of the month of Cronion, at the time when the sowing was about to begin, they and the priests dedicated the animal to Zeus Sosipolis, while solemn prayers were offered by the voice of a sacred herald for the welfare of the city, of the land, and of the people, for peace and wealth, for the corn-crops and all other fruits, and for the cattle. Thereafter the sacred animal was kept throughout the winter, its keep being undertaken by a contractor, who was bound by law to drive the bull to the market and there collect contributions for its maintenance from all the hucksters and in particular from the corn-chandlers; and a prospect was held out to such as contributed that it would go well with them. Finally, after having been thus maintained at the public cost for some months, the bull was led forth with great pomp and sacrificed in the market-place on the twelfth day of the month Artemision, which is believed to have been equivalent to the Attic month of Thargelion and to the English month of May, the season when the corn is reaped in the Greek lowlands. In the procession which attended the animal to the place of sacrifice the senators, the priests, the magistrates, the young people, and the victors in the games all bore a part, and at the head of the procession were borne the images of the Twelve Gods attired in festal array, while a fluteplayer, a piper, and a harper discoursed solemn music.<a href="#note_28" id="noteref_28" name="noteref_28"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">28</span></span></a> Now in the bull, which was thus dedicated at the time of sowing and kept at the cost of the pious, and especially of corn-chandlers, to be finally sacrificed at harvest, it is reasonable to see an embodiment of the corn-spirit. Regarded as such the animal was consecrated when the seed was committed to the earth; it was fed and kept all the time the corn was growing in order that by its beneficent energies it might foster that growth; and at last, to complete the parallel, when the corn was reaped the animal was slain, the cutting of the stalks being regarded as the death of the corn-spirit.<a href="#note_29" id="noteref_29" name="noteref_29"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">29</span></span></a> Similarly we have seen that in the harvest-fields and on the threshing-floors of modern Europe the corn-spirit is often conceived in the form of a bull, an ox, or a calf, which is supposed to be killed at reaping or threshing; and, further, we saw that the conception is sometimes carried out in practice by slaughtering a real ox or a real calf on the harvest-field. Thus the parallelism between the ancient Greek and the modern European idea of the corn-spirit embodied in the form of a bull appears to be very close.</p>
					<p>On the interpretation which I have adopted of the sacrifices offered to Zeus Polieus and Zeus Sosipolis the corn-spirit is conceived as a male, not as a female, as Zeus, not as Demeter or Persephone. In this there is no inconsistency. At the stage of thought which the Greeks had reached long before the dawn of history they supposed the processes of reproduction in nature to be carried on by a male and a female principle in conjunction; they did not believe, like some backward savages, that the female principle alone suffices for that purpose, and that the aid of the male principle is superfluous. Hence, as we have seen, they imagined that the goddesses of the corn, the mother Demeter and the daughter Persephone, had each her male partner with whom she united for the production of the crops. The partner of Demeter was Zeus, the partner of Persephone was his brother Pluto, the Subterranean Zeus, as he was called; and reasons have been shewn for thinking that the marriage of one or other of these divine pairs was solemnised at Eleusis as part of the Great Mysteries in order to promote the growth of the corn.<a href="#note_30" id="noteref_30" name="noteref_30"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">30</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The ox appears as a representative of the corn-spirit in other parts of the world. At Great Bassam, in Guinea, two oxen are slain annually to procure a good harvest. If the sacrifice is to be effectual, it is necessary that the oxen should weep. So all the women of the village sit in front of the beasts, chanting, <span class="tei tei-q">“The ox will weep; yes, he will weep!”</span> From time to time one of the women walks round the beasts, throwing manioc meal or palm wine upon them, especially into their eyes. When tears roll down from the eyes of the oxen, the people dance, singing, <span class="tei tei-q">“The ox weeps! the ox weeps!”</span> Then two men seize the tails of the beasts and cut them off at one blow. It is believed that a great misfortune will happen in the course of the year if the tails are not severed at one blow. The oxen are afterwards killed, and their flesh is eaten by the chiefs.<a href="#note_31" id="noteref_31" name="noteref_31"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">31</span></span></a> Here the tears of the oxen, like those of the human victims amongst the Khonds and the Aztecs,<a href="#note_32" id="noteref_32" name="noteref_32"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">32</span></span></a> are probably a rain-charm. We have already seen that the virtue of the corn-spirit, embodied in animal form, is sometimes supposed to reside in the tail, and that the last handful of corn is sometimes conceived as the tail of the corn spirit.<a href="#note_33" id="noteref_33" name="noteref_33"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">33</span></span></a> In the Mithraic religion this conception is graphically set forth in some of the numerous sculptures which represent Mithras kneeling on the back of a bull and plunging a knife into its flank; for on certain of these monuments the tail of the bull ends in three stalks of corn, and in one of them corn-stalks instead of blood are seen issuing from the wound inflicted by the knife.<a href="#note_34" id="noteref_34" name="noteref_34"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">34</span></span></a> Such representations certainly suggest that the bull, whose sacrifice appears to have formed a leading feature in the Mithraic ritual, was conceived, in one at least of its aspects, as an incarnation of the corn-spirit.</p>
					<p>Still more clearly does the ox appear as a personification of the corn-spirit in a ceremony which is observed in all the provinces and districts of China to welcome the approach of spring. On the first day of spring, usually on the third or fourth of February, which is also the beginning of the Chinese New Year, the governor or prefect of the city goes in procession to the east gate of the city, and sacrifices to the Divine Husbandman, who is represented with a bull's head on the body of a man. A large effigy of an ox, cow, or buffalo has been prepared for the occasion, and stands outside of the east gate, with agricultural implements beside it. The figure is made of differently-coloured pieces of paper pasted on a framework either by a blind man or according to the directions of a necromancer. The colours of the paper prognosticate the character of the coming year; if red prevails, there will be many fires; if white, there will be floods and rain; and so with the other colours. The mandarins walk slowly round the ox, beating it severely at each step with rods of various hues. It is filled with five kinds of grain, which pour forth when the effigy is broken by the blows of the rods. The paper fragments are then set on fire, and a scramble takes place for the burning fragments, because the people believe that whoever gets one of them is sure to be fortunate throughout the year. A live buffalo is next killed, and its flesh is divided among the mandarins. According to one account, the effigy of the ox is made of clay, and, after being beaten by the governor, is stoned by the people till they break it in pieces, <span class="tei tei-q">“from which they expect an abundant year.”</span><a href="#note_35" id="noteref_35" name="noteref_35"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">35</span></span></a> But the ceremony varies somewhat in the different provinces. According to another account the effigy of the cow, made of earthenware, with gilded horns, is borne in procession, and is of such colossal dimensions that forty or fifty men can hardly carry it. Behind this monstrous cow walks a boy with one foot shod and the other bare, personifying the Genius of Industry. He beats the effigy with a rod, as if to drive it forward. A great many little clay cows are afterwards taken out of the large one and distributed among the people. Both the big cow and the little ones are then broken in pieces, and the people take the sherds home with them in order to grind them to powder and strew the powder on their fields, for they think thus to secure a plentiful harvest.<a href="#note_36" id="noteref_36" name="noteref_36"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">36</span></span></a> In the cities nearest to Weihaiwei, in northern China, the ceremony of <span class="tei tei-q">“the Beginning of Spring”</span> is a moveable feast, which falls usually in the first moon. The local magistrate and his attendants go in procession to the eastern suburbs of the city to <span class="tei tei-q">“meet the Spring.”</span> A great pasteboard effigy of an ox is carried in the procession, together with another pasteboard image of a man called Mang-Shen, <span class="tei tei-q">“who represents either the typical ox-driver or ploughman or the god of Agriculture.”</span> On the return of the procession to the magistrate's court, that dignitary himself and his principal colleagues beat and prod the pasteboard ox with wands, after which the effigy is burned along with the image of its attendant. The colours and apparel of the two effigies correspond with the forecasts of the Chinese almanack. Thus if the head of the ox is yellow, the summer will be very hot; if it is green, the spring will be sickly; if it is red, there will be a drought; if it is black, there will be much rain; if it is white, there will be high winds. If Mang-Shen wears a hat, the year will be dry; if he is bareheaded, it will be rainy; and so on with the other articles of his apparel. Besides the pasteboard ox a miniature ox made of clay is also supposed to be provided.<a href="#note_37" id="noteref_37" name="noteref_37"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">37</span></span></a> In Chinese the ceremony is called indifferently <span class="tei tei-q">“beating the ox”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“beating the spring,”</span> which seems to prove that the ox is identified with the vernal energies of nature. We may suppose that originally the ox which figures in the rite was a living animal, but ever since the beginning of our era, when the custom first appears in history, it has been an effigy of terra-cotta or pasteboard. To this day the Chinese calendar devotes a page to a picture of <span class="tei tei-q">“the ox of spring”</span> with Mang, the tutelary genius of spring, standing beside it and grasping a willow-bough, with which he is about to beat the animal for the purpose of stimulating its reproductive virtue.<a href="#note_38" id="noteref_38" name="noteref_38"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">38</span></span></a> In one form of this Chinese custom the corn-spirit appears to be plainly represented by the corn-filled ox, whose fragments may therefore be supposed to bring fertility with them. We may compare the Silesian custom of burning the effigy of Death, scrambling for the burning fragments, and burying them in the fields to secure a good crop, and the Florentine custom of sawing the Old Woman and scrambling for the dried fruits with which she was filled.<a href="#note_39" id="noteref_39" name="noteref_39"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">39</span></span></a> Both these customs, like their Chinese counterpart, are observed in spring.</p>
					<p>The practice of beating an earthenware or pasteboard image of an ox in spring is not confined to China proper, but seems to be widely spread in the east of Asia; for example, it has been recorded at Kashgar and in Annam. Thus a French traveller has described how at Kashgar, on the third of February 1892, a mandarin, clad in his finest robes and borne in a magnificent palanquin, conducted solemnly through the streets the pasteboard image of an ox, <span class="tei tei-q">“a sacred animal devoted to the deity of spring who gives life to the fields. It is thus carried to some distance outside of the town on the eastern side. The official who acts as pontiff ceremoniously offers food and libations to it in order to obtain a fruitful year, and next day it is demolished by the lashes of a whip.”</span><a href="#note_40" id="noteref_40" name="noteref_40"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">40</span></span></a> Again, in Annam, every year at the approach of spring the Department of Rites publishes instructions to the provincial governors as to the manner in which the festival of the inauguration of spring is to be celebrated. Among the indispensable features of the festival are the figures of an ox and its warder made of terra-cotta. The attitudes of the two and the colours to be applied to them are carefully prescribed every year in the Chinese calendar. Popular opinion attributes to the colour of the ox and the accoutrement of its warder, who is called Mang Than, a certain influence on the crops of the year: a green, yellow, and black buffalo prognosticates an abundant harvest: a red or white buffalo foretells wretched crops and great droughts or hurricanes. If Mang Than is represented wearing a large hat, the year will be rainy; if on the other hand he is bareheaded, long barren droughts are to be feared. Nay, the public credulity goes so far as to draw good or evil omens from the cheerfulness or ill humour which may be detected on the features of the Warder of the Ox. Having been duly prepared in accordance with the directions of the almanack, the ox and its warder are carried in procession, followed by the mandarins and the people, to the altar of Spring, which is usually to be found in every provincial capital. There the provincial governor offers fruits, flowers, and incense to the Genius of Spring (<i xml:lang="zh">Xuan Quan</i>), and gold and silver paper money are burnt on the altar in profusion. Lastly the ox and his warder are buried in a spot which has been indicated by a geomancer.<a href="#note_41" id="noteref_41" name="noteref_41"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">41</span></span></a> It is interesting to observe that the three colours of the ox which are taken to prognosticate good crops, to wit, green, yellow, and black, are precisely the colours which the ancients attributed to Demeter, the goddess of the corn.<a href="#note_42" id="noteref_42" name="noteref_42"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">42</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The great importance which the Chinese attach to the performance of rites for the fertility of the ground is proved by an ancient custom which is, or was till lately, observed every year in spring. On an appointed day the emperor himself, attended by the highest dignitaries of the state, guides with his own hand the ox-drawn plough down several furrows and scatters the seed in a sacred field, or <span class="tei tei-q">“field of God,”</span> as it is called, the produce of which is afterwards examined from time to time with anxious care by the Governor of Peking, who draws omens from the appearance of the ears; it is a very happy omen if he should chance to find thirteen ears growing on one stalk. To prepare himself for the celebration of this solemn rite the emperor is expected to fast and remain continent for three days previously, and the princes and mandarins who accompany him to the field are bound to observe similar restrictions. The corn grown on the holy field which has thus been ploughed by the imperial hands is collected in yellow sacks and stored in a special granary to be used by the emperor in certain solemn sacrifices which he offers to the god Chan Ti and to his own ancestors. In the provinces of China the season of ploughing is similarly inaugurated by the provincial governors as representatives of the emperor.<a href="#note_43" id="noteref_43" name="noteref_43"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">43</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The sacred field, or <span class="tei tei-q">“field of God,”</span> in which the emperor of China thus ceremonially opens the ploughing for the year, and of which the produce is employed in sacrifice, reminds us of the Rarian plain at Eleusis, in which a sacred ploughing similarly took place every year, and of which the produce was in like manner devoted to sacrifice.<a href="#note_44" id="noteref_44" name="noteref_44"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">44</span></span></a> Further, it recalls the little sacred rice-fields on which the Kayans of central Borneo inaugurate the various operations of the agricultural year by performing them in miniature.<a href="#note_45" id="noteref_45" name="noteref_45"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">45</span></span></a> As I have already pointed out, all such consecrated enclosures were probably in origin what we may call spiritual preserves, that is, patches of ground which men set apart for the exclusive use of the corn-spirit to console him for the depredations they committed on all the rest of his domains. Again, the rule of fasting and continence observed by the Emperor of China and his august colleagues before they put their hands to the plough resembles the similar customs of abstinence practised by many savages as a preparation for engaging in the various labours of the field.<a href="#note_46" id="noteref_46" name="noteref_46"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">46</span></span></a></p>
					<p>On the whole we may perhaps conclude that both as a goat and as a bull Dionysus was essentially a god of vegetation. The Chinese and European customs which I have cited<a href="#note_47" id="noteref_47" name="noteref_47"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">47</span></span></a> may perhaps shed light on the custom of rending a live bull or goat at the rites of Dionysus. The animal was torn in fragments, as the Khond victim was cut in pieces, in order that the worshippers might each secure a portion of the life-giving and fertilising influence of the god. The flesh was eaten raw as a sacrament, and we may conjecture that some of it was taken home to be buried in the fields, or otherwise employed so as to convey to the fruits of the earth the quickening influence of the god of vegetation. The resurrection of Dionysus, related in his myth, may have been enacted in his rites by stuffing and setting up the slain ox, as was done at the Athenian <i xml:lang="el">bouphonia</i>.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 2. Demeter, the Pig and the Horse.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Passing next to the corn-goddess Demeter, and remembering that in European folk-lore the pig is a common embodiment of the corn-spirit,<a href="#note_48" id="noteref_48" name="noteref_48"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">48</span></span></a> we may now ask whether the pig, which was so closely associated with Demeter, may not have been originally the goddess herself in animal form? The pig was sacred to her;<a href="#note_49" id="noteref_49" name="noteref_49"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">49</span></span></a> in art she was portrayed carrying or accompanied by a pig;<a href="#note_50" id="noteref_50" name="noteref_50"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">50</span></span></a> and the pig was regularly sacrificed in her mysteries, the reason assigned being that the pig injures the corn and is therefore an enemy of the goddess.<a href="#note_51" id="noteref_51" name="noteref_51"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">51</span></span></a> But after an animal has been conceived as a god, or a god as an animal, it sometimes happens, as we have seen, that the god sloughs off his animal form and becomes purely anthropomorphic; and that then the animal, which at first had been slain in the character of the god, comes to be viewed as a victim offered to the god on the ground of its hostility to the deity; in short, the god is sacrificed to himself on the ground that he is his own enemy. This happened to Dionysus,<a href="#note_52" id="noteref_52" name="noteref_52"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">52</span></span></a> and it may have happened to Demeter also. And in fact the rites of one of her festivals, the Thesmophoria, bear out the view that originally the pig was an embodiment of the corn-goddess herself, either Demeter or her daughter and double Persephone. The Attic Thesmophoria was an autumn festival, celebrated by women alone in October,<a href="#note_53" id="noteref_53" name="noteref_53"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">53</span></span></a> and appears to have represented with mourning rites the descent of Persephone (or Demeter)<a href="#note_54" id="noteref_54" name="noteref_54"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">54</span></span></a> into the lower world, and with joy her return from the dead.<a href="#note_55" id="noteref_55" name="noteref_55"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">55</span></span></a> Hence the name Descent or Ascent variously applied to the first, and the name <i xml:lang="el">Kalligeneia</i> (fair-born) applied to the third day of the festival. Now from an old scholium on Lucian<a href="#note_56" id="noteref_56" name="noteref_56"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">56</span></span></a> we learn some details about the mode of celebrating the Thesmophoria, which shed important light on the part of the festival called the Descent or the Ascent. The scholiast tells us that it was customary at the Thesmophoria to throw pigs, cakes of dough, and branches of pine-trees into <span class="tei tei-q">“the chasms of Demeter and Persephone,”</span> which appear to have been sacred caverns or vaults.<a href="#note_57" id="noteref_57" name="noteref_57"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">57</span></span></a> In these caverns or vaults there were said to be serpents, which guarded the caverns and consumed most of the flesh of the pigs and dough-cakes which were thrown in. Afterwards—apparently at the next annual festival<a href="#note_58" id="noteref_58" name="noteref_58"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">58</span></span></a>—the decayed remains of the pigs, the cakes, and the pine-branches were fetched by women called <span class="tei tei-q">“drawers,”</span> who, after observing rules of ceremonial purity for three days, descended into the caverns, and, frightening away the serpents by clapping their hands, brought up the remains and placed them on the altar. Whoever got a piece of the decayed flesh and cakes, and sowed it with the seed-corn in his field, was believed to be sure of a good crop. With the feeding of the serpents in the vaults by the women we may compare an ancient Italian ritual. At Lanuvium a serpent lived in a sacred cave within a grove of Juno. On certain appointed days a number of holy maidens, with their eyes bandaged, entered the grove carrying cakes of barley in their hands. Led, as it was believed, by the divine spirit, they walked straight to the serpent's den and offered him the cakes. If they were chaste, the serpent ate the cakes, the parents of the girls rejoiced, and farmers prognosticated an abundant harvest. But if the girls were unchaste, the serpent left the cakes untasted, and ants came and crumbled the rejected viands and so removed them bit by bit from the sacred grove, thereby purifying the hallowed spot from the stain it had contracted by the presence of a defiled maiden.<a href="#note_59" id="noteref_59" name="noteref_59"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">59</span></span></a></p>
					<p>To explain the rude and ancient ritual of the Thesmophoria the following legend was told. At the moment when Pluto carried off Persephone, a swineherd called Eubuleus chanced to be herding his swine on the spot, and his herd was engulfed in the chasm down which Pluto vanished with Persephone. Accordingly at the Thesmophoria pigs were annually thrown into caverns to commemorate the disappearance of the swine of Eubuleus.<a href="#note_60" id="noteref_60" name="noteref_60"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">60</span></span></a> It follows from this that the casting of the pigs into the vaults at the Thesmophoria formed part of the dramatic representation of Persephone's descent into the lower world; and as no image of Persephone appears to have been thrown in, we may infer that the descent of the pigs was not so much an accompaniment of her descent as the descent itself, in short, that the pigs were Persephone. Afterwards when Persephone or Demeter (for the two are equivalent) took on human form, a reason had to be found for the custom of throwing pigs into caverns at her festival; and this was done by saying that when Pluto carried off Persephone, there happened to be some swine browsing near, which were swallowed up along with her. The story is obviously a forced and awkward attempt to bridge over the gulf between the old conception of the corn-spirit as a pig and the new conception of her as an anthropomorphic goddess. A trace of the older conception survived in the legend that when the sad mother was searching for traces of the vanished Persephone, the footprints of the lost one were obliterated by the footprints of a pig;<a href="#note_61" id="noteref_61" name="noteref_61"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">61</span></span></a> originally, we may conjecture, the footprints of the pig were the footprints of Persephone and of Demeter herself. A consciousness of the intimate connexion of the pig with the corn lurks in the legend that the swineherd Eubuleus was a brother of Triptolemus, to whom Demeter first imparted the secret of the corn. Indeed, according to one version of the story, Eubuleus himself received, jointly with his brother Triptolemus, the gift of the corn from Demeter as a reward for revealing to her the fate of Persephone.<a href="#note_62" id="noteref_62" name="noteref_62"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">62</span></span></a> Further, it is to be noted that at the Thesmophoria the women appear to have eaten swine's flesh.<a href="#note_63" id="noteref_63" name="noteref_63"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">63</span></span></a> The meal, if I am right, must have been a solemn sacrament or communion, the worshippers partaking of the body of the god.</p>
					<p>As thus explained, the Thesmophoria has its analogies in the folk-customs of Northern Europe which have been already described. Just as at the Thesmophoria—an autumn festival in honour of the corn-goddess—swine's flesh was partly eaten, partly kept in caverns till the following year, when it was taken up to be sown with the seed-corn in the fields for the purpose of securing a good crop; so in the neighbourhood of Grenoble the goat killed on the harvest-field is partly eaten at the harvest-supper, partly pickled and kept till the next harvest;<a href="#note_64" id="noteref_64" name="noteref_64"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">64</span></span></a> so at Pouilly the ox killed on the harvest-field is partly eaten by the harvesters, partly pickled and kept till the first day of sowing in spring,<a href="#note_65" id="noteref_65" name="noteref_65"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">65</span></span></a> probably to be then mixed with the seed, or eaten by the ploughmen, or both; so at Udvarhely the feathers of the cock which is killed in the last sheaf at harvest are kept till spring, and then sown with the seed on the field;<a href="#note_66" id="noteref_66" name="noteref_66"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">66</span></span></a> so in Hesse and Meiningen the flesh of pigs is eaten on Ash Wednesday or Candlemas, and the bones are kept till sowing-time, when they are put into the field sown or mixed with the seed in the bag;<a href="#note_67" id="noteref_67" name="noteref_67"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">67</span></span></a> so, lastly, the corn from the last sheaf is kept till Christmas, made into the Yule Boar, and afterwards broken and mixed with the seed-corn at sowing in spring.<a href="#note_68" id="noteref_68" name="noteref_68"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">68</span></span></a> Thus, to put it generally, the corn-spirit is killed in animal form in autumn; part of his flesh is eaten as a sacrament by his worshippers; and part of it is kept till next sowing-time or harvest as a pledge and security for the continuance or renewal of the corn-spirit's energies. Whether in the interval between autumn and spring he is conceived as dead, or whether, like the ox in the <i xml:lang="el">bouphonia</i>, he is supposed to come to life again immediately after being killed, is not clear. At the Thesmophoria, according to Clement and Pausanias, as emended by Lobeck,<a href="#note_69" id="noteref_69" name="noteref_69"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">69</span></span></a> the pigs were thrown in alive, and were supposed to reappear at the festival of the following year. Here, therefore, if we accept Lobeck's emendations, the corn-spirit is conceived as alive throughout the year; he lives and works under ground, but is brought up each autumn to be renewed and then replaced in his subterranean abode.<a href="#note_70" id="noteref_70" name="noteref_70"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">70</span></span></a></p>
					<p>If persons of fastidious taste should object that the Greeks never could have conceived Demeter and Persephone to be embodied in the form of pigs, it may be answered that in the cave of Phigalia in Arcadia the Black Demeter was portrayed with the head and mane of a horse on the body of a woman.<a href="#note_71" id="noteref_71" name="noteref_71"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">71</span></span></a> Between the portrait of a goddess as a pig, and the portrait of her as a woman with a horse's head, there is little to choose in respect of barbarism. The legend told of the Phigalian Demeter indicates that the horse was one of the animal forms assumed in ancient Greece, as in modern Europe,<a href="#note_72" id="noteref_72" name="noteref_72"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">72</span></span></a> by the corn-spirit. It was said that in her search for her daughter, Demeter assumed the form of a mare to escape the addresses of Poseidon, and that, offended at his importunity, she withdrew in dudgeon to a cave not far from Phigalia in the highlands of Western Arcadia. The very cavern, now turned into a little Christian chapel with its holy pictures, is still shewn to the curious traveller far down the side of that profound ravine through which the brawling Neda winds under overhanging woods to the sea. There, robed in black, she tarried so long that the fruits of the earth were perishing, and mankind would have died of famine if Pan had not soothed the angry goddess and persuaded her to quit the cave. In memory of this event, the Phigalians set up an image of the Black Demeter in the cave; it represented a woman dressed in a long robe, with the head and mane of a horse.<a href="#note_73" id="noteref_73" name="noteref_73"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">73</span></span></a> The Black Demeter, in whose absence the fruits of the earth perish, is plainly a mythical expression for the bare wintry earth stripped of its summer mantle of green.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 3. Attis, Adonis, and the Pig.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>Passing now to Attis and Adonis, we may note a few facts which seem to shew that these deities of vegetation had also, like other deities of the same class, their animal embodiments. The worshippers of Attis abstained from eating the flesh of swine.<a href="#note_74" id="noteref_74" name="noteref_74"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">74</span></span></a> This appears to indicate that the pig was regarded as an embodiment of Attis. And the legend that Attis was killed by a boar<a href="#note_75" id="noteref_75" name="noteref_75"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">75</span></span></a> points in the same direction. For after the examples of the goat Dionysus and the pig Demeter it may almost be laid down as a rule that an animal which is said to have injured a god was originally the god himself. Perhaps the cry of <span class="tei tei-q">“Hyes Attes! Hyes Attes!”</span><a href="#note_76" id="noteref_76" name="noteref_76"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">76</span></span></a> which was raised by the worshippers of Attis, may be neither more nor less than <span class="tei tei-q">“Pig Attis! Pig Attis!”</span>—<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">hyes</span></span> being possibly a Phrygian form of the Greek <i xml:lang="el">hȳs</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“a pig.”</span><a href="#note_77" id="noteref_77" name="noteref_77"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">77</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In regard to Adonis, his connexion with the boar was not always explained by the story that he had been killed by the animal.<a href="#note_78" id="noteref_78" name="noteref_78"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">78</span></span></a> According to another story, a boar rent with his tusk the bark of the tree in which the infant Adonis was born.<a href="#note_79" id="noteref_79" name="noteref_79"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">79</span></span></a> According to yet another story, he perished at the hands of Hephaestus on Mount Lebanon while he was hunting wild boars.<a href="#note_80" id="noteref_80" name="noteref_80"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">80</span></span></a> These variations in the legend serve to shew that, while the connexion of the boar with Adonis was certain, the reason of the connexion was not understood, and that consequently different stories were devised to explain it. Certainly the pig ranked as a sacred animal among the Syrians. At the great religious metropolis of Hierapolis on the Euphrates pigs were neither sacrificed nor eaten, and if a man touched a pig he was unclean for the rest of the day. Some people said this was because the pigs were unclean; others said it was because the pigs were sacred.<a href="#note_81" id="noteref_81" name="noteref_81"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">81</span></span></a> This difference of opinion points to a hazy state of religious thought in which the ideas of sanctity and uncleanness are not yet sharply distinguished, both being blent in a sort of vaporous solution to which we give the name of taboo. It is quite consistent with this that the pig should have been held to be an embodiment of the divine Adonis, and the analogies of Dionysus and Demeter make it probable that the story of the hostility of the animal to the god was only a late misapprehension of the old view of the god as embodied in a pig. The rule that pigs were not sacrificed or eaten by worshippers of Attis and presumably of Adonis, does not exclude the possibility that in these rituals the pig was slain on solemn occasions as a representative of the god and consumed sacramentally by the worshippers. Indeed, the sacramental killing and eating of an animal implies that the animal is sacred, and that, as a general rule, it is spared.<a href="#note_82" id="noteref_82" name="noteref_82"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">82</span></span></a></p>
					<p>The attitude of the Jews to the pig was as ambiguous as that of the heathen Syrians towards the same animal. The Greeks could not decide whether the Jews worshipped swine or abominated them.<a href="#note_83" id="noteref_83" name="noteref_83"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">83</span></span></a> On the one hand they might not eat swine; but on the other hand they might not kill them. And if the former rule speaks for the uncleanness, the latter speaks still more strongly for the sanctity of the animal. For whereas both rules may, and one rule must, be explained on the supposition that the pig was sacred; neither rule must, and one rule cannot, be explained on the supposition that the pig was unclean. If, therefore, we prefer the former supposition, we must conclude that, originally at least, the pig was revered rather than abhorred by the Israelites. We are confirmed in this opinion by observing that down to the time of Isaiah some of the Jews used to meet secretly in gardens to eat the flesh of swine and mice as a religious rite.<a href="#note_84" id="noteref_84" name="noteref_84"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">84</span></span></a> Doubtless this was a very ancient ceremony, dating from a time when both the pig and the mouse were venerated as divine, and when their flesh was partaken of sacramentally on rare and solemn occasions as the body and blood of gods. And in general it may be said that all so-called unclean animals were originally sacred; the reason for not eating them was that they were divine.</p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 4. Osiris, the Pig and the Bull.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>In ancient Egypt, within historical times, the pig occupied the same dubious position as in Syria and Palestine, though at first sight its uncleanness is more prominent than its sanctity. The Egyptians are generally said by Greek writers to have abhorred the pig as a foul and loathsome animal.<a href="#note_85" id="noteref_85" name="noteref_85"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">85</span></span></a> If a man so much as touched a pig in passing, he stepped into the river with all his clothes on, to wash off the taint.<a href="#note_86" id="noteref_86" name="noteref_86"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">86</span></span></a> To drink pig's milk was believed to cause leprosy to the drinker.<a href="#note_87" id="noteref_87" name="noteref_87"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">87</span></span></a> Swineherds, though natives of Egypt, were forbidden to enter any temple, and they were the only men who were thus excluded. No one would give his daughter in marriage to a swineherd, or marry a swineherd's daughter; the swineherds married among themselves.<a href="#note_88" id="noteref_88" name="noteref_88"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">88</span></span></a> Yet once a year the Egyptians sacrificed pigs to the moon and to Osiris, and not only sacrificed them, but ate of their flesh, though on any other day of the year they would neither sacrifice them nor taste of their flesh. Those who were too poor to offer a pig on this day baked cakes of dough, and offered them instead.<a href="#note_89" id="noteref_89" name="noteref_89"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">89</span></span></a> This can hardly be explained except by the supposition that the pig was a sacred animal which was eaten sacramentally by his worshippers once a year.</p>
					<p>The view that in Egypt the pig was sacred is borne out by the very facts which, to moderns, might seem to prove the contrary. Thus the Egyptians thought, as we have seen, that to drink pig's milk produced leprosy. But exactly analogous views are held by savages about the animals and plants which they deem most sacred. Thus in the island of Wetar (between New Guinea and Celebes) people believe themselves to be variously descended from wild pigs, serpents, crocodiles, turtles, dogs, and eels; a man may not eat an animal of the kind from which he is descended; if he does so, he will become a leper, and go mad.<a href="#note_90" id="noteref_90" name="noteref_90"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">90</span></span></a> Amongst the Omaha Indians of North America men whose totem is the elk, believe that if they ate the flesh of the male elk they would break out in boils and white spots in different parts of their bodies.<a href="#note_91" id="noteref_91" name="noteref_91"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">91</span></span></a> In the same tribe men whose totem is the red maize, think that if they ate red maize they would have running sores all round their mouths.<a href="#note_92" id="noteref_92" name="noteref_92"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">92</span></span></a> The Bush negroes of Surinam, who practise totemism, believe that if they ate the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">capiaï</span></span> (an animal like a pig) it would give them leprosy;<a href="#note_93" id="noteref_93" name="noteref_93"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">93</span></span></a> perhaps the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">capiaï</span></span> is one of their totems. The Syrians, in antiquity, who esteemed fish sacred, thought that if they ate fish their bodies would break out in ulcers, and their feet and stomach would swell up.<a href="#note_94" id="noteref_94" name="noteref_94"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">94</span></span></a> The Nyanja-speaking tribes of Central Angoniland, in British Central Africa, believe that if a person eats his totemic animal, his body will break out in spots. The cure for this eruption of the skin is to bathe the body in a decoction made from the bone of the animal, the eating of which caused the malady.<a href="#note_95" id="noteref_95" name="noteref_95"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">95</span></span></a> The Wagogo of German East Africa imagine that the sin of eating the totemic animal is visited not on the sinner himself but on his innocent kinsfolk. Thus when they see a child with a scald head, they say at once that its father has been eating his totem and that is why the poor child has scabs on its pate.<a href="#note_96" id="noteref_96" name="noteref_96"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">96</span></span></a> Among the Wahehe, another tribe of German East Africa, a man who suffers from scab or other skin disease will often set the trouble down to his having unwittingly partaken of his totemic animal.<a href="#note_97" id="noteref_97" name="noteref_97"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">97</span></span></a> Similarly among the Waheia, another tribe of the same region, if a man kills or eats the totemic animal of his clan, he is supposed to suffer from an eruption of the skin.<a href="#note_98" id="noteref_98" name="noteref_98"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">98</span></span></a> In like manner the Bantu tribes of Kavirondo, in Central Africa, hold that the eating of the totem produces a severe cutaneous eruption, which can however be cured by mixing an extract of certain herbs with the fat of a black ox and rubbing the body of the sufferer all over with the mixture.<a href="#note_99" id="noteref_99" name="noteref_99"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">99</span></span></a> The Chasas of Orissa believe that if they were to injure their totemic animal, they would be attacked by leprosy and their line would die out.<a href="#note_100" id="noteref_100" name="noteref_100"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">100</span></span></a> These examples prove that the eating of a sacred animal is often believed to produce leprosy or other skin-diseases; so far, therefore, they support the view that the pig must have been sacred in Egypt, since the effect of drinking its milk was believed to be leprosy. Such fancies may perhaps have been sometimes suggested by the observation that the eating of semi-putrid flesh, to which some savages are addicted, is apt to be followed by eruptions on the skin. Indeed, many modern authorities attribute leprosy to this cause, particularly to the eating of half rotten fish.<a href="#note_101" id="noteref_101" name="noteref_101"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">101</span></span></a> It seems not impossible that the abhorrence which the Hebrews entertained of leprosy, and the pains which they took to seclude lepers from the community, may have been based on religious as well as on purely sanitary grounds; they may have imagined that the disfigurement of the sufferers was a penalty which they had incurred by some infraction of taboo. Certainly we read in the Old Testament of cases of leprosy which the historian regarded as the direct consequence of sin.<a href="#note_102" id="noteref_102" name="noteref_102"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">102</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Again, the rule that, after touching a pig, a man had to wash himself and his clothes, also favours the view of the sanctity of the pig. For it is a common belief that the effect of contact with a sacred object must be removed, by washing or otherwise, before a man is free to mingle with his fellows. Thus the Jews wash their hands after reading the sacred scriptures. Before coming forth from the tabernacle after the sin-offering, the high priest had to wash himself, and put off the garments which he had worn in the holy place.<a href="#note_103" id="noteref_103" name="noteref_103"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">103</span></span></a> It was a rule of Greek ritual that, in offering an expiatory sacrifice, the sacrificer should not touch the sacrifice, and that, after the offering was made, he must wash his body and his clothes in a river or spring before he could enter a city or his own house.<a href="#note_104" id="noteref_104" name="noteref_104"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">104</span></span></a> The Parjas, a small tribe of the Central Provinces in India, are divided into clans which have for their respective totems the tiger, the tortoise, the goat, a big lizard, a dove, and so on. If a man accidentally kills his totemic animal, <span class="tei tei-q">“the earthen cooking-pots of his household are thrown away, the clothes are washed, and the house is purified with water in which the bark of the mango or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">jamun</span></span> tree (<i xml:lang="la">Eugenia jambolana</i>) has been steeped. This is in sign of mourning, as it is thought that such an act will bring misfortune.”</span><a href="#note_105" id="noteref_105" name="noteref_105"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">105</span></span></a> If a Chadwar of the Central Provinces who has the pig for his totem should even see a pig killed by somebody else, he will throw away the household crockery and clean the house as if on the death of a member of his family.<a href="#note_106" id="noteref_106" name="noteref_106"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">106</span></span></a> The Polynesians felt strongly the need of ridding themselves of the sacred contagion, if it may be so called, which they caught by touching sacred objects. Various ceremonies were performed for the purpose of removing this contagion. We have seen, for example, how in Tonga a man who happened to touch a sacred chief, or anything personally belonging to him, had to perform a certain ceremony before he could feed himself with his hands; otherwise it was believed that he would swell up and die, or at least be afflicted with scrofula or some other disease.<a href="#note_107" id="noteref_107" name="noteref_107"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">107</span></span></a> We have seen, too, what fatal effects are supposed to follow, and do actually follow, from contact with a sacred object in New Zealand.<a href="#note_108" id="noteref_108" name="noteref_108"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">108</span></span></a> In short, primitive man believes that what is sacred is dangerous; it is pervaded by a sort of electrical sanctity which communicates a shock to, even if it does not kill, whatever comes in contact with it. Hence the savage is unwilling to touch or even to see that which he deems peculiarly holy. Thus Bechuanas, of the Crocodile clan, think it <span class="tei tei-q">“hateful and unlucky”</span> to meet or see a crocodile; the sight is thought to cause inflammation of the eyes. Yet the crocodile is their most sacred object; they call it their father, swear by it, and celebrate it in their festivals.<a href="#note_109" id="noteref_109" name="noteref_109"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">109</span></span></a> The goat is the sacred animal of the Madenassana Bushmen; yet <span class="tei tei-q">“to look upon it would be to render the man for the time impure, as well as to cause him undefined uneasiness.”</span><a href="#note_110" id="noteref_110" name="noteref_110"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">110</span></span></a> The Elk clan, among the Omaha Indians, believe that even to touch the male elk would be followed by an eruption of boils and white spots on the body.<a href="#note_111" id="noteref_111" name="noteref_111"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">111</span></span></a> Members of the Reptile clan in the same tribe think that if one of them touches or smells a snake, it will make his hair white.<a href="#note_112" id="noteref_112" name="noteref_112"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">112</span></span></a> In Samoa people whose god was a butterfly believed that if they caught a butterfly it would strike them dead.<a href="#note_113" id="noteref_113" name="noteref_113"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">113</span></span></a> Again, in Samoa the reddish-seared leaves of the banana-tree were commonly used as plates for handing food; but if any member of the Wild Pigeon family had used banana leaves for this purpose, it was supposed that he would suffer from rheumatic swellings or an eruption all over the body like chicken-pox.<a href="#note_114" id="noteref_114" name="noteref_114"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">114</span></span></a> The Mori clan of the Bhils in Central India worship the peacock as their totem and make offerings of grain to it; yet members of the clan believe that were they even to set foot on the tracks of a peacock they would afterwards suffer from some disease, and if a woman sees a peacock she must veil her face and look away.<a href="#note_115" id="noteref_115" name="noteref_115"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">115</span></span></a> Thus the primitive mind seems to conceive of holiness as a sort of dangerous virus, which a prudent man will shun as far as possible, and of which, if he should chance to be infected by it, he will carefully disinfect himself by some form of ceremonial purification.</p>
					<p>In the light of these parallels the beliefs and customs of the Egyptians touching the pig are probably to be explained as based upon an opinion of the extreme sanctity rather than of the extreme uncleanness of the animal; or rather, to put it more correctly, they imply that the animal was looked on, not simply as a filthy and disgusting creature, but as a being endowed with high supernatural powers, and that as such it was regarded with that primitive sentiment of religious awe and fear in which the feelings of reverence and abhorrence are almost equally blended. The ancients themselves seem to have been aware that there was another side to the horror with which swine seemed to inspire the Egyptians. For the Greek astronomer and mathematician Eudoxus, who resided fourteen months in Egypt and conversed with the priests,<a href="#note_116" id="noteref_116" name="noteref_116"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">116</span></span></a> was of opinion that the Egyptians spared the pig, not out of abhorrence, but from a regard to its utility in agriculture; for, according to him, when the Nile had subsided, herds of swine were turned loose over the fields to tread the seed down into the moist earth.<a href="#note_117" id="noteref_117" name="noteref_117"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">117</span></span></a> But when a being is thus the object of mixed and implicitly contradictory feelings, he may be said to occupy a position of unstable equilibrium. In course of time one of the contradictory feelings is likely to prevail over the other, and according as the feeling which finally predominates is that of reverence or abhorrence, the being who is the object of it will rise into a god or sink into a devil. The latter, on the whole, was the fate of the pig in Egypt. For in historical times the fear and horror of the pig seem certainly to have outweighed the reverence and worship of which he may once have been the object, and of which, even in his fallen state, he never quite lost trace. He came to be looked on as an embodiment of Set or Typhon, the Egyptian devil and enemy of Osiris. For it was in the shape of a black pig that Typhon injured the eye of the god Horus, who burned him and instituted the sacrifice of the pig, the sun-god Ra having declared the beast abominable.<a href="#note_118" id="noteref_118" name="noteref_118"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">118</span></span></a> Again, the story that Typhon was hunting a boar when he discovered and mangled the body of Osiris, and that this was the reason why pigs were sacrificed once a year,<a href="#note_119" id="noteref_119" name="noteref_119"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">119</span></span></a> is clearly a modernised version of an older story that Osiris, like Adonis and Attis, was slain or mangled by a boar, or by Typhon in the form of a boar. Thus, the annual sacrifice of a pig to Osiris might naturally be interpreted as vengeance inflicted on the hostile animal that had slain or mangled the god. But, in the first place, when an animal is thus killed as a solemn sacrifice once and once only in the year, it generally or always means that the animal is divine, that he is spared and respected the rest of the year as a god and slain, when he is slain, also in the character of a god.<a href="#note_120" id="noteref_120" name="noteref_120"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">120</span></span></a> In the second place, the examples of Dionysus and Demeter, if not of Attis and Adonis, have taught us that the animal which is sacrificed to a god on the ground that he is the god's enemy may have been, and probably was, originally the god himself. Therefore, the annual sacrifice of a pig to Osiris, coupled with the alleged hostility of the animal to the god, tends to shew, first, that originally the pig was a god, and, second, that he was Osiris. At a later age, when Osiris became anthropomorphic and his original relation to the pig had been forgotten, the animal was first distinguished from him, and afterwards opposed as an enemy to him by mythologists who could think of no reason for killing a beast in connexion with the worship of a god except that the beast was the god's enemy; or, as Plutarch puts it, not that which is dear to the gods, but that which is the contrary, is fit to be sacrificed.<a href="#note_121" id="noteref_121" name="noteref_121"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">121</span></span></a> At this later stage the havoc which a wild boar notoriously makes amongst the corn would supply a plausible reason for regarding him as the foe of the corn-spirit, though originally, if I am right, the very freedom with which the boar ranged at will through the corn led people to identify him with the corn-spirit, to whom he was afterwards opposed as an enemy.</p>
					<p>As the depredations committed by wild swine on the growing crops in countries where these creatures abound are necessarily unfamiliar to most English readers, it may be well to illustrate them by examples. Thus, for instance, in Palestine the wild boar <span class="tei tei-q">“is eagerly chased and destroyed on account of the frightful ravages it makes among the crops. Not only does it devour any fruits within reach, but in a single night a party of wild boars will uproot a whole field, and destroy the husbandman's hopes for the year. The places they love to frequent are the reedy marshes and thickets by rivers and lakes, and they swarm in the thickets all along the banks of the Jordan from Jericho to the Lake of Gennesaret. From these fastnesses, whence neither dog nor man can dislodge them, they make nightly forays upon the corn-fields and root-crops of the villagers, returning at daybreak to their coverts. About Jericho they are especially destructive, and when the barley crop is ripening, the husbandmen have to keep nightly watch to drive them away. Their presence can always be detected by the crashing noise they make in forcing their way through the thickets, when the men fire, guided by the sound.”</span><a href="#note_122" id="noteref_122" name="noteref_122"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">122</span></span></a> Wild pigs are the special enemies of the crops in South Africa; the fences constructed by the Zulus round their gardens are mainly designed to guard against the devastating depredations of these brutes, though porcupines, baboons, hippopotamuses, and elephants also make havoc of the ripe grain. Sometimes small huts are erected on platforms in the gardens, and in these huts watchers are set to scare away the nocturnal invaders.<a href="#note_123" id="noteref_123" name="noteref_123"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">123</span></span></a> So in British Central Africa sentinels are posted day and night in huts raised on platforms to protect the maize fields from the inroads of baboons and of wild pigs, which are still more destructive than the baboons, for they grub up the plants as well as devour the grain; and the watchers drum continually on any metal they have at hand to keep the marauders at bay.<a href="#note_124" id="noteref_124" name="noteref_124"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">124</span></span></a> In the island of Nias whole fields are sometimes trampled down by these pests between sunset and sunrise. Often the stillness of the serene equatorial night is broken by the strident cries of the watchers of the fields; the sound goes echoing through the wooded valleys for a long time, and here and there a dull grunting tells that the efforts of the sentinels have not been in vain.<a href="#note_125" id="noteref_125" name="noteref_125"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">125</span></span></a> In Northern Luzon, of the Philippine Archipelago, the rice-fields are similarly exposed to the depredations of wild hogs, and watchers remain on guard day and night in outlooks, sometimes in commodious structures of stone erected for the purpose, who burn fires at night to frighten the animals away.<a href="#note_126" id="noteref_126" name="noteref_126"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">126</span></span></a> At the beginning of their annual agricultural labours the Banars of Cambodia pray to Yang-Seri that he would be pleased to give them plenty of rice and to prevent the wild boars from eating it up.<a href="#note_127" id="noteref_127" name="noteref_127"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">127</span></span></a> In Gayo-land, a district of Sumatra, the worst enemies of the rice crops are wild swine and field mice; the whole of the harvest is sometimes destroyed by their inroads.<a href="#note_128" id="noteref_128" name="noteref_128"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">128</span></span></a> Among the Kai of German New Guinea people who are engaged in the labour of the fields will on no account eat pork. The reason is that pigs, both wild and tame, are the most dangerous foes of the crops; therefore it seems clear to the mind of the Kai that if a field labourer were to eat pork, the flesh of the dead pig in his stomach would attract the living pigs into the field.<a href="#note_129" id="noteref_129" name="noteref_129"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">129</span></span></a> Perhaps this superstition, based on the principle of sympathetic magic, may explain the aversion to pork which was entertained by some of the agricultural peoples of the Eastern Mediterranean in antiquity.</p>
					<p>To people thus familiarised with the ravages of wild boars among the ripe crops the idea might naturally present itself that the animal is either the enemy of the corn-god or perhaps the corn-god himself come in person to enjoy his own despite all the efforts of mankind to keep him out of his rights. Hence we can understand how an agricultural people like the ancient Egyptians may have identified the wild boar either with their corn-god Osiris or with his enemy Typhon. The view which identifies the pig with Osiris derives not a little support from the sacrifice of pigs to him on the very day on which, according to tradition, Osiris himself was killed;<a href="#note_130" id="noteref_130" name="noteref_130"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">130</span></span></a> for thus the killing of the pig was the annual representation of the killing of Osiris, just as the throwing of the pigs into the caverns at the Thesmophoria was an annual representation of the descent of Persephone into the lower world; and both customs are parallel to the European practice of killing a goat, cock, and so forth, at harvest as a representative of the corn-spirit.</p>
					<p>Again, the theory that the pig, originally Osiris himself, afterwards came to be regarded as an embodiment of his enemy Typhon, is supported by the similar relation of red-haired men and red oxen to Typhon. For in regard to the red-haired men who were burned and whose ashes were scattered with winnowing-fans, we have seen fair grounds for believing that originally, like the red-haired puppies killed at Rome in spring, they were representatives of the corn-spirit himself, that is, of Osiris, and were slain for the express purpose of making the corn turn red or golden.<a href="#note_131" id="noteref_131" name="noteref_131"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">131</span></span></a> Yet at a later time these men were explained to be representatives, not of Osiris, but of his enemy Typhon,<a href="#note_132" id="noteref_132" name="noteref_132"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">132</span></span></a> and the killing of them was regarded as an act of vengeance inflicted on the enemy of the god. Similarly, the red oxen sacrificed by the Egyptians were said to be offered on the ground of their resemblance to Typhon;<a href="#note_133" id="noteref_133" name="noteref_133"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">133</span></span></a> though it is more likely that originally they were slain on the ground of their resemblance to the corn-spirit Osiris. We have seen that the ox is a common representative of the corn-spirit and is slain as such on the harvest-field.</p>
					<p>Osiris was regularly identified with the bull Apis of Memphis and the bull Mnevis of Heliopolis.<a href="#note_134" id="noteref_134" name="noteref_134"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">134</span></span></a> But it is hard to say whether these bulls were embodiments of him as the corn-spirit, as the red oxen appear to have been, or whether they were not in origin entirely distinct deities who came to be fused with Osiris at a later time. The universality of the worship of these two bulls<a href="#note_135" id="noteref_135" name="noteref_135"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">135</span></span></a> seems to put them on a different footing from the ordinary sacred animals whose worships were purely local. Hence if the latter were evolved from totems, as they may have been, some other origin would have to be found for the worship of Apis and Mnevis. If these bulls were not originally embodiments of the corn-god Osiris, they may possibly be descendants of the sacred cattle worshipped by a pastoral people.<a href="#note_136" id="noteref_136" name="noteref_136"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">136</span></span></a> If this were so, ancient Egypt would exhibit a stratification of three great types of religion or superstition corresponding to three great stages of society. Totemism, which may be roughly described as a species of superstitious respect paid to wild animals and plants by many tribes in the hunting stage of society, would be represented by the worship of the local sacred animals; the worship of cattle, which belongs to society in the pastoral stage, would be represented by the cults of Apis and Mnevis; and the worship of cultivated plants, which is peculiar to society in the agricultural stage, would be represented by the religion of Osiris and Isis. The Egyptian reverence for cows, which were never killed,<a href="#note_137" id="noteref_137" name="noteref_137"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">137</span></span></a> might belong either to the second or the third of these stages. The consecration of cows to Isis, who was portrayed with cow's horns<a href="#note_138" id="noteref_138" name="noteref_138"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">138</span></span></a> and may have been supposed to be incarnate in the animals, would indicate that they, like the red oxen, were embodiments of the corn-spirit. However, this identification of Isis with the cow, like that of Osiris with the bulls Apis and Mnevis, may be only an effect of syncretism. But whatever the original relation of Apis to Osiris may have been, there is one fact about the former which ought not to be passed over in a disquisition on the custom of killing a god. Although the bull Apis was worshipped as a god with much pomp and profound reverence, he was not suffered to live beyond a certain length of time which was prescribed by the sacred books, and on the expiry of which he was drowned in a holy spring.<a href="#note_139" id="noteref_139" name="noteref_139"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">139</span></span></a> The limit, according to Plutarch, was twenty-five years;<a href="#note_140" id="noteref_140" name="noteref_140"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">140</span></span></a> but it cannot always have been enforced, for the tombs of the Apis bulls have been discovered in modern times, and from the inscriptions on them it appears that in the twenty-second dynasty two of the holy steers lived more than twenty-six years.<a href="#note_141" id="noteref_141" name="noteref_141"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">141</span></span></a></p>
					<p>To prevent misunderstandings it may be well to add that what I have just said as to the stratification of three great types of religion or superstition corresponding to three great types of society is not meant to sketch, even in outline, the evolution of religion as a whole. I by no means wish to suggest that the reverence for wild animals and plants, the reverence for domestic cattle, and the reverence for cultivated plants are the only forms of religion or superstition which prevail at the corresponding stages of social development; all that I desire to convey is that they are characteristic of these stages respectively. The elements which make up any religious system are far too numerous and their interaction far too complex to be adequately summed up in a few simple formulas. To mention only a single factor of which I have taken no account in indicating roughly a certain correspondence between the strata of religion and of society, the fear of the spirits of the dead appears to have been one of the most powerful factors, perhaps, indeed, the most powerful of all, in shaping the course of religious evolution at every stage of social development from the lowest to the highest; and for that very reason it is not specially characteristic of any one form of society. And the three types of religion or superstition which I have selected as characteristic of three stages of society are far from being strictly limited each to its corresponding step in the social ladder. For example, although totemism, or a particular species of reverence paid by groups of men to wild animals and plants, probably always originated in the hunting stage of society, it has by no means been confined to that primitive phase of human development but has often survived not only into the pastoral but into the agricultural stage, as we may see for example by the case of many tribes in Africa, India, and America; and it seems likely that a similar overlapping of the various strata takes place in every instance. In short, we cannot really dissect the history of mankind as it were with a knife into a series of neat sections each sharply marked off from all the rest by a texture and colour of its own; we may indeed do so theoretically for the convenience of exposition, but practically the textures interlace, the colours melt and run into each other by insensible gradations that defy the edge of the finest instrument of analysis which we can apply to them. It is a mere truism to say that the abstract generalisations of science can never adequately comprehend all the particulars of concrete reality. The facts of nature will always burst the narrow bonds of human theories.</p>
					<p>Before quitting this part of our subject it may be well to illustrate by one or two examples the reverence which primitive pastoral tribes pay to their cattle, since, as I have just indicated, the worship of sacred bulls by the ancient Egyptians, like the modern Hindoo worship of cows, may very well have been directly derived from a similar respect paid by their remote ancestors to their cattle. A good instance is supplied by the Dinka, a large cattle-breeding tribe, or rather nation, of the White Nile. <span class="tei tei-q">“Every idea and thought of the Dinka,”</span> says Schweinfurth, <span class="tei tei-q">“is how to acquire and maintain cattle: a kind of reverence would seem to be paid to them; even their offal is considered of high importance; the dung, which is burnt to ashes for sleeping in and for smearing their persons, and the urine, which is used for washing and as a substitute for salt, are their daily requisites. It must be owned that it is hard to reconcile this latter usage with our ideas of cleanliness. A cow is never slaughtered, but when sick it is segregated from the rest, and carefully tended in the large huts built for the purpose. Only those that die naturally or by an accident are used as food. All this, which exists among most of the pastoral tribes of Africa, may perchance appear to be a lingering remnant of an exploded cattle-worship; but I may draw attention to the fact that the Dinka are by no means disinclined to partake of any feast of their flesh, provided that the slaughtered animal was not their own property. It is thus more the delight of actual possession, than any superstitious estimate, that makes the cow to them an object of reverence. Indescribable is the grief when either death or rapine has robbed a Dinka of his cattle. He is prepared to redeem their loss by the heaviest sacrifices, for they are dearer to him than wife or child. A dead cow is not, however, wantonly buried; the negro is not sentimental enough for that; such an occurrence is soon bruited abroad, and the neighbours institute a carousal, which is quite an epoch in their monotonous life. The bereaved owner himself is, however, too much afflicted at the loss to be able to touch a morsel of the carcass of his departed beast. Not unfrequently in their sorrow the Dinka remain for days silent and abstracted, as though their trouble were too heavy for them to bear.”</span><a href="#note_142" id="noteref_142" name="noteref_142"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">142</span></span></a> A rich Dinka will sometimes keep a favourite ox and treat it with such marks of respect that an observer has compared the animal to the Apis of the ancient Egyptians. <span class="tei tei-q">“Here and there,”</span> we are told, <span class="tei tei-q">“beside the hut of a wealthy negro is set up a great withered tree. From its boughs hang vessels containing food and perhaps trophies of war; to its trunk is fastened the great drum (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Noqara</span></span>), which summons to war or to the dance. To this tree, separated from the rest of the cattle, is tethered a great fat ox. It is of a white colour passing into a slaty grey on the shoulders and legs: its long horns are artificially bent to opposite sides and adorned with bunches of hair: the tuft of the tail is cut off. This is the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">makwi</span></span>, the Apis of the negro. His master, who has singled him out from his youth for his colour and certain marks, has cherished and reared him in order that he may one day be his pride in the eyes of the village. He has gelded him, adorned him, trained him to walk at the head of the herd, to dance, and to fight. His <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">makwi</span></span> is always an object of his tenderest attention; he never fails to bring him a bundle of the finest herbs; if he can procure a bell, he hangs it round the animal's neck; and at evening, if he has milk or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">meriá¹£a</span></span> enough for guests, the drum is beaten to summon the youth to come and dance round the deified ox.”</span><a href="#note_143" id="noteref_143" name="noteref_143"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">143</span></span></a></p>
					<p>Again, speaking of the Nuehr, another pastoral tribe of the Upper Nile, a traveller tells us that <span class="tei tei-q">“as among the Dinka, so among the Nuehr-negroes the cattle enjoy a respect, indeed we may say a veneration, which reminds us of the animal worship of the ancient Egyptians, especially of that of the holy steer Apis, though the respect may be grounded on the simple fact that cattle are the only possession of these negroes. The largest and handsomest bull is the leader of the herd; he is decked with bunches of hair and small bells, marked out from the rest in every way, and regarded as the guardian genius of the herd as well as of the family. His loss is the greatest misfortune that can befall his owner. At night his master drives the animal round the herd, couched about the smoky fire, and sings of his beauty and courage, while the bull signifies his contentment by a complacent lowing. To him his master every morning commits the herd, in order that he may guide them to the best pastures and guard them from danger; in him he reveres his ideal of all that is beautiful and strong; nay he designates him by the same name which he applies to his own dim conception of a Supreme Being, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nyeledit</span></span>, and to the thunder.”</span><a href="#note_144" id="noteref_144" name="noteref_144"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">144</span></span></a></p>
				</div>
				<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
					<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
						<span style="font-size: 144%">§ 5. Virbius and the Horse.</span>
					</h2>
					<p>We are now in a position to hazard a conjecture as to the meaning of the tradition that Virbius, the first of the divine Kings of the Wood at Aricia, had been killed in the character of Hippolytus by horses.<a href="#note_145" id="noteref_145" name="noteref_145"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">145</span></span></a> Having found, first, that spirits of the corn are not infrequently represented in the form of horses;<a href="#note_146" id="noteref_146" name="noteref_146"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">146</span></span></a> and, second, that the animal which in later legends is said to have injured the god was sometimes originally the god himself, we may conjecture that the horses by which Virbius or Hippolytus was said to have been slain were really embodiments of him as a deity of vegetation. The myth that he had been killed by horses was probably invented to explain certain features in his worship, amongst others the custom of excluding horses from his sacred grove. For myth changes while custom remains constant; men continue to do what their fathers did before them, though the reasons on which their fathers acted have been long forgotten. The history of religion is a long attempt to reconcile old custom with new reason, to find a sound theory for an absurd practice. In the case before us we may be sure that the myth is more modern than the custom and by no means represents the original reason for excluding horses from the grove. From their exclusion it might be inferred that horses could not be the sacred animals or embodiments of the god of the grove. But the inference would be rash. The goat was at one time a sacred animal or embodiment of Athena, as may be inferred from the practice of representing the goddess clad in a goat-skin (<i xml:lang="el">aegis</i>). Yet the goat was neither sacrificed to her as a rule, nor allowed to enter her great sanctuary, the Acropolis at Athens. The reason alleged for this was that the goat injured the olive, the sacred tree of Athena.<a href="#note_147" id="noteref_147" name="noteref_147"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">147</span></span></a> So far, therefore, the relation of the goat of Athena is parallel to the relation of the horse to Virbius, both animals being excluded from the sanctuary on the ground of injury done by them to the god. But from Varro we learn that there was an exception to the rule which excluded the goat from the Acropolis. Once a year, he says, the goat was driven on to the Acropolis for a necessary sacrifice.<a href="#note_148" id="noteref_148" name="noteref_148"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">148</span></span></a> Now, as has been remarked before, when an animal is sacrificed once and once only in the year, it is probably slain, not as a victim offered to the god, but as a representative of the god himself. Therefore we may infer that if a goat was sacrificed on the Acropolis once a year, it was sacrificed in the character of Athena herself;<a href="#note_149" id="noteref_149" name="noteref_149"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">149</span></span></a> and it may be conjectured that the skin of the sacrificed animal was placed on the statue of the goddess and formed the <i xml:lang="el">aegis</i>, which would thus be renewed annually. Similarly at Thebes in Egypt rams were sacred and were not sacrificed. But on one day in the year a ram was killed, and its skin was placed on the statue of the god Ammon.<a href="#note_150" id="noteref_150" name="noteref_150"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">150</span></span></a> Now, if we knew the ritual of the Arician grove better, we might find that the rule of excluding horses from it, like the rule of excluding goats from the Acropolis at Athens, was subject to an annual exception, a horse being once a year taken into the grove and sacrificed as an embodiment of the god Virbius.<a href="#note_151" id="noteref_151" name="noteref_151"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">151</span></span></a> By the usual misunderstanding the horse thus killed would come in time to be regarded as an enemy offered up in sacrifice to the god whom he had injured, like the pig which was sacrificed to Demeter and Osiris or the goat which was sacrificed to Dionysus, and possibly to Athena. It is so easy for a writer to record a rule without noticing an exception that we need not wonder at finding the rule of the Arician grove recorded without any mention of an exception such as I suppose. If we had had only the statements of Athenaeus and Pliny, we should have known only the rule which forbade the sacrifice of goats to Athena and excluded them from the Acropolis, without being aware of the important exception which the fortunate preservation of Varro's work has revealed to us.</p>
					<p>The conjecture that once a year a horse may have been sacrificed in the Arician grove as a representative of the deity of the grove derives some support from the similar sacrifice of a horse which took place once a year at Rome. On the fifteenth of October in each year a chariot-race was run on the Field of Mars. Stabbed with a spear, the right-hand horse of the victorious team was then sacrificed to Mars for the purpose of ensuring good crops, and its head was cut off and adorned with a string of loaves. Thereupon the inhabitants of two wards—the Sacred Way and the Subura—contended with each other who should get the head. If the people of the Sacred Way got it, they fastened it to a wall of the king's house; if the people of the Subura got it, they fastened it to the Mamilian tower. The horse's tail was cut off and carried to the king's house with such speed that the blood dripped on the hearth of the house.<a href="#note_152" id="noteref_152" name="noteref_152"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">152</span></span></a> Further, it appears that the blood of the horse was caught and preserved till the twenty-first of April, when the Vestal virgins mixed it with the blood of the unborn calves which had been sacrificed six days before. The mixture was then distributed to shepherds, and used by them for fumigating their flocks.<a href="#note_153" id="noteref_153" name="noteref_153"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">153</span></span></a></p>
					<p>In this ceremony the decoration of the horse's head<a href="#note_154" id="noteref_154" name="noteref_154"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">154</span></span></a> with a string of loaves, and the alleged object of the sacrifice, namely, to procure a good harvest, seem to indicate that the horse was killed as one of those animal representatives of the corn-spirit of which we have found so many examples. The custom of cutting off the horse's tail is like the African custom of cutting off the tails of the oxen and sacrificing them to obtain a good crop.<a href="#note_155" id="noteref_155" name="noteref_155"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">155</span></span></a> In both the Roman and the African custom the animal apparently stands for the corn-spirit, and its fructifying power is supposed to reside especially in its tail. The latter idea occurs, as we have seen, in European folk-lore.<a href="#note_156" id="noteref_156" name="noteref_156"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">156</span></span></a> Again, the practice of fumigating the cattle in spring with the blood of the horse may be compared with the practice of giving the Old Wife, the Maiden, or the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">clyack</span></span> sheaf as fodder to the horses in spring or the cattle at Christmas, and giving the Yule Boar to the ploughing oxen or horses to eat in spring.<a href="#note_157" id="noteref_157" name="noteref_157"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">157</span></span></a> All these usages aim at ensuring the blessing of the corn-spirit on the homestead and its inmates and storing it up for another year.</p>
					<p>The Roman sacrifice of the October horse, as it was called, carries us back to the early days when the Subura, afterwards a low and squalid quarter of the great metropolis, was still a separate village, whose inhabitants engaged in a friendly contest on the harvest-field with their neighbours of Rome, then a little rural town. The Field of Mars on which the ceremony took place lay beside the Tiber, and formed part of the king's domain down to the abolition of the monarchy. For tradition ran that at the time when the last of the kings was driven from Rome, the corn stood ripe for the sickle on the crown lands beside the river; but no one would eat the accursed grain and it was flung into the river in such heaps that, the water being low with the summer heat, it formed the nucleus of an island.<a href="#note_158" id="noteref_158" name="noteref_158"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">158</span></span></a> The horse sacrifice was thus an old autumn custom observed upon the king's corn-fields at the end of the harvest. The tail and blood of the horse, as the chief parts of the corn-spirit's representative, were taken to the king's house and kept there; just as in Germany the harvest-cock is nailed on the gable or over the door of the farmhouse; and as the last sheaf, in the form of the Maiden, is carried home and kept over the fireplace in the Highlands of Scotland. Thus the blessing of the corn-spirit was brought to the king's house and hearth and, through them, to the community of which he was the head. Similarly in the spring and autumn customs of Northern Europe the Maypole is sometimes set up in front of the house of the mayor or burgomaster, and the last sheaf at harvest is brought to him as the head of the village. But while the tail and blood fell to the king, the neighbouring village of the Subura, which no doubt once had a similar ceremony of its own, was gratified by being allowed to compete for the prize of the horse's head. The Mamilian tower, to which the Suburans nailed the horse's head when they succeeded in carrying it off, appears to have been a peel-tower or keep of the old Mamilian family, the magnates of the village.<a href="#note_159" id="noteref_159" name="noteref_159"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">159</span></span></a> The ceremony thus performed on the king's fields and at his house on behalf of the whole town and of the neighbouring village presupposes a time when each township performed a similar ceremony on its own fields. In the rural districts of Latium the villages may have continued to observe the custom, each on its own land, long after the Roman hamlets had merged their separate harvest-homes in the common celebration on the king's lands. There is no intrinsic improbability in the supposition that the sacred grove of Aricia, like the Field of Mars at Rome, may have been the scene of a common harvest celebration, at which a horse was sacrificed with the same rude rites on behalf of the neighbouring villages. The horse would represent the fructifying spirit both of the tree and of the corn, for the two ideas melt into each other, as we see in customs like the Harvest-May.</p>
					<p>However, it should be borne in mind that the evidence for thus interpreting the relation of horses to Virbius is exceedingly slender, and that the custom of excluding horses from the sacred Arician grove may have been based on some other superstitious motive which entirely escapes us. At the city of Ialysus in Rhodes there was a sanctuary of Alectrona, one of the daughters of the Sun, into which no horse, ass, mule, or beast of burden of any kind might enter. Any person who broke the law by introducing one of these animals into the holy precinct, had to purify the place by a sacrifice; and the same atonement had to be made by any man who brought shoes or any portion of a pig within the sacred boundaries. And whoever drove or suffered his sheep to stray into the precinct was obliged to pay a fine of one obol for every sheep that set foot in it.<a href="#note_160" id="noteref_160" name="noteref_160"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">160</span></span></a> The reasons for these prohibitions are quite unknown; and the taboo on horses is particularly remarkable, since the Rhodians were in the habit of offering a chariot and horses every year to the Sun, the father of Alectrona,<a href="#note_161" id="noteref_161" name="noteref_161"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">161</span></span></a> doubtless in order that he might ride on them through the sky. Did they think that it was not for the daughter of the Sun to meddle with horses, which were the peculiar property of her father? The conjecture may perhaps be supported by an analogy drawn from West Africa. The Ewe negroes of the Slave Coast conceive the Rain-god Nyikplã as a man who rides a horse, and who may be seen galloping on it through the sky in the form of a shooting star. Hence in the town of Angla, where he generally resides when he is at home, no person may appear on horseback in the streets, that being apparently regarded as an impious usurpation of the style of the deity. In former days even Europeans were forbidden to ride on horseback in Angla; and missionaries who attempted to set the local prejudice at defiance have been pelted with sticks and dirt by the outraged natives.<a href="#note_162" id="noteref_162" name="noteref_162"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">162</span></span></a> Another deity who suffered not horses to enter his sacred place was Rakelimalaza, a Malagasy god whose name signifies <span class="tei tei-q">“renowned, although diminutive.”</span> His residence was a village situated on the top of a hill about seven miles east of Tananarivo. But horses were not the only animal or thing to which this fastidious being entertained a rooted aversion. <span class="tei tei-q">“Within the limits of the ground which is considered sacred, and which embraces a wide circumference in the immediate vicinity of the idol's residence, it is strictly forbidden to bring, or to suffer to come, certain animals and certain objects, which are carefully specified by the keepers of the idol. Things thus forbidden are called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">fady</span></span>; a term of similar import with the well-known tabu of the South Sea Islands. Every idol has its own particular <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">fady</span></span>. The things prohibited by Rakelimalaza are, guns, gunpowder, pigs, onions, sifotra (a shell-fish resembling a snail), sitry (a small animal resembling the young crocodile), striped or spotted robes, anything of a black colour, goats, horses, meat distributed at funerals or at the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">tangena</span></span>, and cats and owls. Its keepers are forbidden to enter any house where there is a corpse; and in crossing a river they are not permitted to say, <span class="tei tei-q">‘Carry me,’</span> otherwise they place themselves in danger of being seized by the crocodiles; and in war they must not talk, or they are in danger of being shot.”</span><a href="#note_163" id="noteref_163" name="noteref_163"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">163</span></span></a> To attempt to discover the particular reasons for all these numerous and varied taboos would obviously be futile; many of them may be based on accidental circumstances which for us are lost past recovery. But it may be worth while to observe that a variety of taboos was enforced at other ancient Greek shrines besides the sanctuary of Alectrona at Ialysus. For example, no person was allowed to enter the sanctuary of the Mistress at Lycosura in Arcadia clad in black, purple, or flowered vestments, or wearing shoes or a ring, or with his or her hair plaited or covered, or carrying flowers in his hand;<a href="#note_164" id="noteref_164" name="noteref_164"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">164</span></span></a> and no pomegranates might be brought into the sanctuary, though all other fruits of the orchard were free to enter.<a href="#note_165" id="noteref_165" name="noteref_165"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">165</span></span></a> These instances may warn us against the danger of arguing too confidently in favour of any one of the many possible reasons which may have moved the old Latins to exclude horses from the sacred Arician grove. The domain of primitive superstition, in spite of the encroachments of science, is indeed still to a great extent a trackless wilderness, a tangled maze, in the gloomy recesses of which the forlorn explorer may wander for ever without a light and without a clue.</p>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
