<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-3-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter VIII. Osiris and the Moon.</span>
				</h1>
				<p>Before we conclude this study of Osiris it will be worth while to consider an ancient view of his nature, which deserves more attention than it has received in modern times. We are told by Plutarch that among the philosophers who saw in the gods of Egypt personifications of natural objects and forces, there were some who interpreted Osiris as the moon and his enemy Typhon as the sun, <span class="tei tei-q">“because the moon, with her humid and generative light, is favourable to the propagation of animals and the growth of plants; while the sun with his fierce fire scorches and burns up all growing things, renders the greater part of the earth uninhabitable by reason of his blaze, and often overpowers the moon herself.”</span><a href="#note_321" id="noteref_321" name="noteref_321"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">321</span></span></a> Whatever may be thought of the physical qualities here attributed to the moon, the arguments adduced by the ancients to prove the identity of Osiris with that luminary carry with them a weight which has at least not been lightened by the results of modern research. An examination of them and of other evidence pointing in the same direction will, perhaps, help to set the original character of the Egyptian deity in a clearer light.<a href="#note_322" id="noteref_322" name="noteref_322"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">322</span></span></a></p>
				<p>1. Osiris was said to have lived or reigned twenty-eight years. This might fairly be taken as a mythical expression for a lunar month.<a href="#note_323" id="noteref_323" name="noteref_323"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">323</span></span></a></p>
				<p>2. His body was reported to have been rent into fourteen pieces.<a href="#note_324" id="noteref_324" name="noteref_324"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">324</span></span></a> This might be interpreted of the waning moon, which appears to lose a portion of itself on each of the fourteen days that make up the second half of a lunar month. It is expressly said that his enemy Typhon found the body of Osiris at the full moon;<a href="#note_325" id="noteref_325" name="noteref_325"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">325</span></span></a> thus the dismemberment of the god would begin with the waning of the moon. To primitive man it seems manifest that the waning moon is actually dwindling, and he naturally enough explains its diminution by supposing that the planet is being rent or broken in pieces or eaten away. The Klamath Indians of Oregon speak of the moon as <span class="tei tei-q">“the one broken to pieces”</span> with reference to its changing aspect; they never apply such a term to the sun,<a href="#note_326" id="noteref_326" name="noteref_326"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">326</span></span></a> whose apparent change of bulk at different seasons of the year is far too insignificant to attract the attention of the savage, or at least to be described by him in such forcible language. The Dacotas believe that when the moon is full, a great many little mice begin to nibble at one side of it and do not cease till they have eaten it all up, after which a new moon is born and grows to maturity, only to share the fate of its countless predecessors.<a href="#note_327" id="noteref_327" name="noteref_327"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">327</span></span></a> A similar belief is held by the Huzuls of the Carpathians, except that they ascribe the destruction of the old moon to wolves instead of to mice.<a href="#note_328" id="noteref_328" name="noteref_328"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">328</span></span></a></p>
				<p>3. At the new moon of the month Phamenoth, which was the beginning of spring, the Egyptians celebrated what they called <span class="tei tei-q">“the entry of Osiris into the moon.”</span><a href="#note_329" id="noteref_329" name="noteref_329"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">329</span></span></a></p>
				<p>4. At the ceremony called <span class="tei tei-q">“the burial of Osiris”</span> the Egyptians made a crescent-shaped chest <span class="tei tei-q">“because the moon, when it approaches the sun, assumes the form of a crescent and vanishes.”</span><a href="#note_330" id="noteref_330" name="noteref_330"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">330</span></span></a></p>
				<p>5. The bull Apis, held to be an image of the soul of Osiris,<a href="#note_331" id="noteref_331" name="noteref_331"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">331</span></span></a> was born of a cow which was believed to have been impregnated, not in the vulgar way by a bull, but by a divine influence emanating from the moon.<a href="#note_332" id="noteref_332" name="noteref_332"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">332</span></span></a></p>
				<p>6. Once a year, at the full moon, pigs were sacrificed simultaneously to the moon and Osiris.<a href="#note_333" id="noteref_333" name="noteref_333"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">333</span></span></a></p>
				<p>7. In a hymn supposed to be addressed by Isis to Osiris, it is said that Thoth—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left; margin-left: 7.20em">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Placeth thy soul in the bark Ma-at,</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">In that name which is thine, of</span>
									<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
										<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic; font-variant: small-caps">God Moon</span>
									</span>
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>And again:—</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Thou who comest to us as a child each month,</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">We do not cease to contemplate thee.</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Thine emanation heightens the brilliancy</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Of the stars of Orion in the firmament.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span><a href="#note_334" id="noteref_334" name="noteref_334">
								<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">334</span>
								</span>
							</a>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>Here then Osiris is identified with the moon in set terms. If in the same hymn he is said to <span class="tei tei-q">“illuminate us like Ra”</span> (the sun), that is obviously no reason for identifying him with the sun, but quite the contrary. For though the moon may reasonably be compared to the sun, neither the sun nor anything else can reasonably be compared to itself.</p>
				<p>8. In art Osiris is sometimes represented as a human-headed mummy grasping in his hands his characteristic emblems and wearing on his head, instead of the usual crown, a full moon within a crescent.<a href="#note_335" id="noteref_335" name="noteref_335"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">335</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Now if in one of his aspects Osiris was originally a deity of vegetation, we can easily enough understand why in a later and more philosophic age he should come to be thus identified or confounded with the moon.<a href="#note_336" id="noteref_336" name="noteref_336"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">336</span></span></a> For as soon as he begins to meditate upon the causes of things, the early philosopher is led by certain obvious, though fallacious, appearances to regard the moon as the ultimate cause of the growth of plants. In the first place he associates its apparent growth and decay with the growth and decay of sublunary things, and imagines that in virtue of a secret sympathy the celestial phenomena really produce those terrestrial changes which in point of fact they merely resemble. Thus Pliny says that the moon may fairly be considered the planet of breath, <span class="tei tei-q">“because it saturates the earth and by its approach fills bodies, while by its departure it empties them. Hence it is,”</span> he goes on, <span class="tei tei-q">“that shell-fish increase with the increase of the moon and that bloodless creatures especially feel breath at that time; even the blood of men grows and diminishes with the light of the moon, and leaves and herbage also feel the same influence, since the lunar energy penetrates all things.”</span><a href="#note_337" id="noteref_337" name="noteref_337"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">337</span></span></a> <span class="tei tei-q">“There is no doubt,”</span> writes Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-q">“that the moon is the author and framer of mortal bodies, so much so that some things expand or shrink as it waxes or wanes.”</span><a href="#note_338" id="noteref_338" name="noteref_338"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">338</span></span></a> Again, Aulus Gellius puts in the mouth of a friend the remark that <span class="tei tei-q">“the same things which grow with the waxing, do dwindle with the waning moon,”</span> and he quotes from a commentary of Plutarch's on Hesiod a statement that the onion is the only vegetable which violates this great law of nature by sprouting in the wane and withering in the increase of the moon.<a href="#note_339" id="noteref_339" name="noteref_339"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">339</span></span></a> Scottish Highlanders allege that in the increase of the moon everything has a tendency to grow or stick together;<a href="#note_340" id="noteref_340" name="noteref_340"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">340</span></span></a> and they call the second moon of autumn <span class="tei tei-q">“the ripening moon”</span> (<i>Gealach an abachaidh</i>), because they imagine that crops ripen as much by its light as by day.<a href="#note_341" id="noteref_341" name="noteref_341"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">341</span></span></a></p>
				<p>From this supposed influence of the moon on the life of plants and animals, men in ancient and modern times have deduced a whole code of rules for the guidance of the husbandman, the shepherd, and others in the conduct of their affairs. Thus an ancient writer on agriculture lays it down as a maxim, that whatever is to be sown should be sown while the moon is waxing, and that whatever is to be cut or gathered should be cut or gathered while it is waning.<a href="#note_342" id="noteref_342" name="noteref_342"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">342</span></span></a> A modern treatise on superstition describes how the superstitious man regulates all his conduct by the moon: <span class="tei tei-q">“Whatever he would have to grow, he sets about it when she is in her increase; but for what he would have made less he chooses her wane.”</span><a href="#note_343" id="noteref_343" name="noteref_343"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">343</span></span></a> In Germany the phases of the moon are observed by superstitious people at all the more or even less important actions of life, such as tilling the fields, building or changing houses, marriages, hair-cutting, bleeding, cupping, and so forth. The particular rules vary in different places, but the principle generally followed is that whatever is done to increase anything should be done while the moon is waxing; whatever is done to diminish anything should be done while the moon is waning. For example, sowing, planting, and grafting should be done in the first half of the moon, but the felling of timber and mowing should be done in the second half.<a href="#note_344" id="noteref_344" name="noteref_344"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">344</span></span></a> In various parts of Europe it is believed that plants, nails, hair, and corns, cut while the moon is on the increase, will grow again fast, but that if cut while it is on the decrease they will grow slowly or waste away.<a href="#note_345" id="noteref_345" name="noteref_345"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">345</span></span></a> Hence persons who wish their hair to grow thick and long should cut it in the first half of the moon.<a href="#note_346" id="noteref_346" name="noteref_346"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">346</span></span></a> On the same principle sheep are shorn when the moon is waxing, because it is supposed that the wool will then be longest and most enduring.<a href="#note_347" id="noteref_347" name="noteref_347"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">347</span></span></a> Some negroes of the Gaboon think that taro and other vegetables never thrive if they are planted after full moon, but that they grow fast and strong if they are planted in the first quarter.<a href="#note_348" id="noteref_348" name="noteref_348"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">348</span></span></a> The Highlanders of Scotland used to expect better crops of grain by sowing their seed in the moon's increase.<a href="#note_349" id="noteref_349" name="noteref_349"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">349</span></span></a> On the other hand they thought that garden vegetables, such as onions and kail, run to seed if they are sown in the increase, but that they grow to pot-herbs if they are sown in the wane.<a href="#note_350" id="noteref_350" name="noteref_350"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">350</span></span></a> So Thomas Tusser advised the peasant to sow peas and beans in the wane of the moon <span class="tei tei-q">“that they with the planet may rest and arise.”</span><a href="#note_351" id="noteref_351" name="noteref_351"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">351</span></span></a> The Zulus welcome the first appearance of the new moon with beating of drums and other demonstrations of joy; but next day they abstain from all labour, <span class="tei tei-q">“thinking that if anything is sown on those days they can never reap the benefit thereof.”</span><a href="#note_352" id="noteref_352" name="noteref_352"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">352</span></span></a> But in this matter of sowing and planting a refined distinction is sometimes drawn by French, German, and Esthonian peasants; plants which bear fruit above ground are sown by them when the moon is waxing, but plants which are cultivated for the sake of their roots, such as potatoes and turnips, are sown when the moon is waning.<a href="#note_353" id="noteref_353" name="noteref_353"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">353</span></span></a> The reason for this distinction seems to be a vague idea that the waxing moon is coming up and the waning moon going down, and that accordingly fruits which grow upwards should be sown in the former period, and fruits which grow downwards in the latter. Before beginning to plant their cacao the Pipiles of Central America exposed the finest seeds for four nights to the moonlight,<a href="#note_354" id="noteref_354" name="noteref_354"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">354</span></span></a> but whether they did so at the waxing or waning of the moon is not said. Even pots, it would seem, are not exempt from this great law of nature. In Uganda <span class="tei tei-q">“potters waited for the new moon to appear before baking their pots; when it was some days old, they prepared their fires and baked the vessels. No potter would bake pots when the moon was past the full, for he believed that they would be a failure, and would be sure to crack or break in the burning, if he did so, and that his labour accordingly would go for nothing.”</span><a href="#note_355" id="noteref_355" name="noteref_355"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">355</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Again, the waning of the moon has been commonly recommended both in ancient and modern times as the proper time for felling trees,<a href="#note_356" id="noteref_356" name="noteref_356"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">356</span></span></a> apparently because it was thought fit and natural that the operation of cutting down should be performed on earth at the time when the lunar orb was, so to say, being cut down in the sky. In France before the Revolution the forestry laws enjoined that trees should only be felled after the moon had passed the full; and in French bills announcing the sale of timber you may still read a notice that the wood was cut in the waning of the moon.<a href="#note_357" id="noteref_357" name="noteref_357"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">357</span></span></a> So among the Shans of Burma, when a house is to be built, it is a rule that <span class="tei tei-q">“a lucky day should be chosen to commence the cutting of the bamboos. The day must not only be a fortunate one for the builder, but it must also be in the second half of the month, when the moon is waning. Shans believe that if bamboos are cut during the first half of the month, when the moon is waxing, they do not last well, as boring insects attack them and they will soon become rotten. This belief is prevalent all over the East.”</span><a href="#note_358" id="noteref_358" name="noteref_358"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">358</span></span></a> A like belief obtains in various parts of Mexico. No Mexican will cut timber while the moon is increasing; they say it must be cut while the moon is waning or the wood will certainly rot.<a href="#note_359" id="noteref_359" name="noteref_359"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">359</span></span></a> In Colombia, South America, people think that corn should only be sown and timber felled when the moon is on the wane. They say that the waxing moon draws the sap up through the trunk and branches, whereas the sap flows down and leaves the wood dry during the wane of the moon.<a href="#note_360" id="noteref_360" name="noteref_360"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">360</span></span></a> But sometimes the opposite rule is adopted, and equally forcible arguments are urged in its defence. Thus, when the Wabondei of Eastern Africa are about to build a house, they take care to cut the posts for it when the moon is on the increase; for they say that posts cut when the moon is wasting away would soon rot, whereas posts cut while the moon is waxing are very durable.<a href="#note_361" id="noteref_361" name="noteref_361"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">361</span></span></a> The same rule is observed for the same reason in some parts of Germany.<a href="#note_362" id="noteref_362" name="noteref_362"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">362</span></span></a></p>
				<p>But the partisans of the ordinarily received opinion have sometimes supported it by another reason, which introduces us to the second of those fallacious appearances by which men have been led to regard the moon as the cause of growth in plants. From observing rightly that dew falls most thickly on cloudless nights, they inferred wrongly that it was caused by the moon, a theory which the poet Alcman expressed in mythical form by saying that dew was a daughter of Zeus and the moon.<a href="#note_363" id="noteref_363" name="noteref_363"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">363</span></span></a> Hence the ancients concluded that the moon is the great source of moisture, as the sun is the great source of heat.<a href="#note_364" id="noteref_364" name="noteref_364"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">364</span></span></a> And as the humid power of the moon was assumed to be greater when the planet was waxing than when it was waning, they thought that timber cut during the increase of the luminary would be saturated with moisture, whereas timber cut in the wane would be comparatively dry. Hence we are told that in antiquity carpenters would reject timber felled when the moon was growing or full, because they believed that such timber teemed with sap;<a href="#note_365" id="noteref_365" name="noteref_365"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">365</span></span></a> and in the Vosges at the present day people allege that wood cut at the new moon does not dry.<a href="#note_366" id="noteref_366" name="noteref_366"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">366</span></span></a> We have seen that the same reason is assigned for the same practice in Colombia.<a href="#note_367" id="noteref_367" name="noteref_367"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">367</span></span></a> In the Hebrides peasants give the same reason for cutting their peats when the moon is on the wane; <span class="tei tei-q">“for they observe that if they are cut in the increase, they continue still moist and never burn clear, nor are they without smoke, but the contrary is daily observed of peats cut in the decrease.”</span><a href="#note_368" id="noteref_368" name="noteref_368"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">368</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Thus misled by a double fallacy primitive philosophy comes to view the moon as the great cause of vegetable growth, first, because the planet seems itself to grow, and second, because it is supposed to be the source of dew and moisture. It is no wonder, therefore, that agricultural peoples should adore the planet which they believe to influence so profoundly the crops on which they depend for subsistence. Accordingly we find that in the hotter regions of America, where maize is cultivated and manioc is the staple food, the moon was recognized as the principal object of worship, and plantations of manioc were assigned to it as a return for the service it rendered in the production of the crops. The worship of the moon in preference to the sun was general among the Caribs, and, perhaps, also among most of the other Indian tribes who cultivated maize in the tropical forests to the east of the Andes; and the same thing has been observed, under the same physical conditions, among the aborigines of the hottest region of Peru, the northern valleys of Yuncapata. Here the Indians of Pacasmayu and the neighbouring valleys revered the moon as their principal divinity. The <span class="tei tei-q">“house of the moon”</span> at Pacasmayu was the chief temple of the district; and the same sacrifices of maize-flour, of wine, and of children which were offered by the mountaineers of the Andes to the Sun-god, were offered by the lowlanders to the Moon-god in order that he might cause their crops to thrive.<a href="#note_369" id="noteref_369" name="noteref_369"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">369</span></span></a> In ancient Babylonia, where the population was essentially agricultural, the moon-god took precedence of the sun-god and was indeed reckoned his father.<a href="#note_370" id="noteref_370" name="noteref_370"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">370</span></span></a></p>
				<p>Hence it would be no matter for surprise if, after worshipping the crops which furnished them with the means of subsistence, the ancient Egyptians should in later times have identified the spirit of the corn with the moon, which a false philosophy had taught them to regard as the ultimate cause of the growth of vegetation. In this way we can understand why in their most recent forms the myth and ritual of Osiris, the old god of trees and corn, should bear many traces of efforts made to bring them into a superficial conformity with the new doctrine of his lunar affinity.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
