<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<a id="toc105" name="toc105"/>
				<a id="pdf106" name="pdf106"/>
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter VII. Hyacinth.</span>
				</h2>
				<p>Another mythical being who has been supposed to belong to the class of gods here discussed is Hyacinth. He too has been interpreted as the vegetation which blooms in spring and withers under the scorching heat of the summer sun.<a href="#note_943" id="noteref_943" name="noteref_943"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">943</span></span></a> Though he belongs to Greek, not to Oriental mythology, some account of him may not be out of place in the present discussion. According to the legend, Hyacinth was the youngest and handsomest son of the ancient king Amyclas, who had his capital at Amyclae in the beautiful vale of Sparta. One day playing at quoits with Apollo, he was accidentally killed by a blow of the god's quoit. Bitterly the god lamented the death of his friend. The hyacinth—<span class="tei tei-q">“that sanguine flower inscribed with woe”</span>—sprang from the blood of the hapless youth, as anemones and roses from the blood of Adonis, and violets from the blood of Attis:<a href="#note_944" id="noteref_944" name="noteref_944"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">944</span></span></a> like these vernal flowers it heralded the advent of another spring and gladdened the hearts of men with the promise of a joyful resurrection. The flower is usually supposed to be not what we call a hyacinth, but a little purple iris with the letters of lamentation (AI, which in Greek means <span class="tei tei-q">“alas”</span>) clearly inscribed in black on its petals. In Greece it blooms in spring after the early violets but before the roses.<a href="#note_945" id="noteref_945" name="noteref_945"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">945</span></span></a> One spring, when the hyacinths were in bloom, it happened that the red-coated Spartan regiments lay encamped under the walls of Corinth. Their commander gave the Amyclean battalion leave to go home and celebrate as usual the festival of Hyacinth in their native town. But the sad flower was to be to these men an omen of death; for they had not gone far before they were enveloped by clouds of light-armed foes and cut to pieces.<a href="#note_946" id="noteref_946" name="noteref_946"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">946</span></span></a></p>
				<p>The tomb of Hyacinth was at Amyclae under a massive altar-like pedestal, which supported an archaic bronze image of Apollo. In the left side of the pedestal was a bronze door, and through it offerings were passed to Hyacinth, as to a hero or a dead man, not as to a god, before sacrifices were offered to Apollo at the annual Hyacinthian festival. Bas-reliefs carved on the pedestal represented Hyacinth and his maiden sister Polyboea caught up to heaven by a company of goddesses.<a href="#note_947" id="noteref_947" name="noteref_947"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">947</span></span></a> The annual festival of the Hyacinthia was held in the month of Hecatombeus, which seems to have corresponded to May.<a href="#note_948" id="noteref_948" name="noteref_948"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">948</span></span></a> The ceremonies occupied three days. On the first the people mourned for Hyacinth, wearing no wreaths, singing no paeans, eating no bread, and behaving with great gravity. It was on this day probably that the offerings were made at Hyacinth's tomb. Next day the scene was changed. All was joy and bustle. The capital was emptied of its inhabitants, who poured out in their thousands to witness and share the festivities at Amyclae. Boys in high-girt tunics sang hymns in honour of the god to the accompaniment of flutes and lyres. Others, splendidly attired, paraded on horseback in the theatre: choirs of youths chanted their native ditties: dancers danced: maidens rode in wicker carriages or went in procession to witness the chariot races: sacrifices were offered in profusion: the citizens feasted their friends and even their slaves.<a href="#note_949" id="noteref_949" name="noteref_949"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">949</span></span></a> This outburst of gaiety may be supposed to have celebrated the resurrection of Hyacinth and perhaps also his ascension to heaven, which, as we have seen, was represented on his tomb. However, it may be that the ascension took place on the third day of the festival; but as to that we know nothing. The sister who went to heaven with him was by some identified with Artemis or Persephone.<a href="#note_950" id="noteref_950" name="noteref_950"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">950</span></span></a></p>
				<p>It is highly probable, as Erwin Rohde perceived,<a href="#note_951" id="noteref_951" name="noteref_951"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">951</span></span></a> that Hyacinth was an old aboriginal deity of the underworld who had been worshipped at Amyclae long before the Dorians invaded and conquered the country. If that was so, the story of his relation to Apollo must have been a comparatively late invention, an attempt of the newcomers to fit the ancient god of the land into their own mythical system, in order that he might extend his protection to them. On this theory it may not be without significance that sacrifices at the festival were offered to Hyacinth, as to a hero, before they were offered to Apollo.<a href="#note_952" id="noteref_952" name="noteref_952"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">952</span></span></a> Further, on the analogy of similar deities elsewhere, we should expect to find Hyacinth coupled, not with a male friend, but with a female consort. That consort may perhaps be detected in his sister Polyboea, who ascended to heaven with him. The new myth, if new it was, of the love of Apollo for Hyacinth would involve a changed conception of the aboriginal god, which in its turn must have affected that of his spouse. For when Hyacinth came to be thought of as young and unmarried there was no longer room in his story for a wife, and she would have to be disposed of in some other way. What was easier for the myth-maker than to turn her into his unmarried sister? However we may explain it, a change seems certainly to have come over the popular idea of Hyacinth; for whereas on his tomb he was portrayed as a bearded man, later art represented him as the pink of youthful beauty.<a href="#note_953" id="noteref_953" name="noteref_953"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">953</span></span></a> But it is perhaps needless to suppose that the sisterly relation of Polyboea to him was a late modification of the myth. The stories of Cronus and Rhea, of Zeus and Hera, of Osiris and Isis, remind us that in old days gods, like kings, often married their sisters, and probably for the same reason, namely, to ensure their own title to the throne under a rule of female kinship which treated women and not men as the channel in which the blood royal flowed.<a href="#note_954" id="noteref_954" name="noteref_954"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">954</span></span></a> It is not impossible that Hyacinth may have been a divine king who actually reigned in his lifetime at Amyclae and was afterwards worshipped at his tomb. The representation of his triumphal ascent to heaven in company with his sister suggests that, like Adonis and Persephone, he may have been supposed to spend one part of the year in the under-world of darkness and death, and another part in the upper-world of light and life. And as the anemones and the sprouting corn marked the return of Adonis and Persephone, so the flowers to which he gave his name may have heralded the ascension of Hyacinth.</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
