<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-3-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
				<a id="toc39" name="toc39"/>
				<a id="pdf40" name="pdf40"/>
				<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
					<span style="font-size: 173%">Chapter VI. Isis.</span>
				</h1>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Multifarious attributes of Isis.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">The original meaning of the goddess Isis is still more difficult to determine than that of her brother and husband Osiris. Her attributes and epithets were so numerous that in the hieroglyphics she is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the many-named,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“the thousand-named,”</span> and in Greek inscriptions <span class="tei tei-q">“the myriad-named.”</span><a href="#note_282" id="noteref_282" name="noteref_282"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">282</span></span></a> The late eminent Dutch scholar C. P. Tiele confessed candidly that <span class="tei tei-q">“it is now impossible to tell precisely to what natural phenomena the character of Isis at first referred.”</span> Yet he adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“Originally she was a goddess of fecundity.”</span><a href="#note_283" id="noteref_283" name="noteref_283"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">283</span></span></a> Similarly Dr. Budge writes that <span class="tei tei-q">“Isis was the great and beneficent goddess and mother, whose influence and love pervaded all heaven and earth and the abode of the dead, and she was the personification of the great feminine, creative power which conceived, and brought forth every living creature and thing, from the gods in heaven to man on the earth, and to the insect on the ground; what she brought forth she protected, and cared for, and fed, and nourished, and she employed her life in using her power graciously and successfully, not only in creating new beings but in restoring those that were dead. She was, besides these things, the highest type of a faithful and loving wife <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page116">[pg 116]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg116" name="Pg116"/> and mother, and it was in this capacity that the Egyptians honoured and worshipped her most.”</span><a href="#note_284" id="noteref_284" name="noteref_284"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">284</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">How Isis resembled yet differed from the Mother Goddesses of Asia. Isis perhaps originally a goddess of the corn.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Thus in her character of a goddess of fecundity Isis answered to the great mother goddesses of Asia, though she differed from them in the chastity and fidelity of her conjugal life; for while they were unmarried and dissolute, she had a husband and was a true wife to him as well as an affectionate mother to their son. Hence her beautiful Madonna-like figure reflects a more refined state of society and of morals than the coarse, sensual, cruel figures of Astarte, Anaitis, Cybele, and the rest of that crew. A clear trace, indeed, of an ethical standard very different from our own lingers in her double relation of sister and wife to Osiris; but in most other respects she is rather late than primitive, the full-blown flower rather than the seed of a long religious development. The attributes ascribed to her were too various to be all her own. They were graces borrowed from many lesser deities, sweets rifled from a thousand humbler plants to feed the honey of her superb efflorescence. Yet in her complex nature it is perhaps still possible to detect the original nucleus round which by a slow process of accretion the other elements gathered. For if her brother and husband Osiris was in one of his aspects the corn-god, as we have seen reason to believe, she must surely have been the corn-goddess. There are at least some grounds for thinking so. For if we may trust Diodorus Siculus, whose authority appears to have been the Egyptian historian Manetho, the discovery of wheat and barley was attributed to Isis, and at her festivals stalks of these grains were carried in procession to commemorate the boon she had conferred on men.<a href="#note_285" id="noteref_285" name="noteref_285"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">285</span></span></a> A further detail is added by Augustine. He says that Isis made the discovery of barley at the moment when she was sacrificing to the common ancestors of her husband and herself, all of whom had been kings, and that she showed the newly discovered ears of barley to Osiris and his councillor Thoth or Mercury, as Roman writers called him. That is why, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page117">[pg 117]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg117" name="Pg117"/> adds Augustine, they identify Isis with Ceres.<a href="#note_286" id="noteref_286" name="noteref_286"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">286</span></span></a> Further, at harvest-time, when the Egyptian reapers had cut the first stalks, they laid them down and beat their breasts, wailing and calling upon Isis.<a href="#note_287" id="noteref_287" name="noteref_287"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">287</span></span></a> The custom has been already explained as a lament for the corn-spirit slain under the sickle.<a href="#note_288" id="noteref_288" name="noteref_288"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">288</span></span></a> Amongst the epithets by which Isis is designated in the inscriptions are <span class="tei tei-q">“Creatress of green things,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Green goddess, whose green colour is like unto the greenness of the earth,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Lady of Bread,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Lady of Beer,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Lady of Abundance.”</span><a href="#note_289" id="noteref_289" name="noteref_289"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">289</span></span></a> According to Brugsch she is <span class="tei tei-q">“not only the creatress of the fresh verdure of vegetation which covers the earth, but is actually the green corn-field itself, which is personified as a goddess.”</span><a href="#note_290" id="noteref_290" name="noteref_290"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">290</span></span></a> This is confirmed by her epithet <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Sochit</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Sochet</span></span>, meaning <span class="tei tei-q">“a corn-field,”</span> a sense which the word still retains in Coptic.<a href="#note_291" id="noteref_291" name="noteref_291"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">291</span></span></a> The Greeks conceived of Isis as a corn-goddess, for they identified her with Demeter.<a href="#note_292" id="noteref_292" name="noteref_292"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">292</span></span></a> In a Greek epigram she is described as <span class="tei tei-q">“she who has given birth to the fruits of the earth,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“the mother of the ears of corn”</span>;<a href="#note_293" id="noteref_293" name="noteref_293"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">293</span></span></a> and in a hymn composed in her honour she speaks of herself as <span class="tei tei-q">“queen of the wheat-field,”</span> and is described as <span class="tei tei-q">“charged with the care of the fruitful furrow's wheat-rich path.”</span><a href="#note_294" id="noteref_294" name="noteref_294"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">294</span></span></a> Accordingly, Greek or Roman artists often represented her with ears of corn on her head or in her hand.<a href="#note_295" id="noteref_295" name="noteref_295"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">295</span></span></a></p>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em"/>
				<div class="tei tei-marginnote tei-marginnote-margin">
					<div class="tei tei-marginnotetext">
						<span style="font-size: 80%">Refinement and spiritualization of Isis in later times: the popularity of her worship in the Roman empire. Resemblance of Isis to the Madonna.</span>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p class="tei tei-p" style="margin-bottom: 1.00em">Such, we may suppose, was Isis in the olden time, a rustic Corn-Mother adored with uncouth rites by Egyptian swains. But the homely features of the clownish goddess could hardly be traced in the refined, the saintly form which, spiritualized by ages of religious evolution, she presented to her worshippers of after days as the true wife, the tender <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page118">[pg 118]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg118" name="Pg118"/> mother, the beneficent queen of nature, encircled with the nimbus of moral purity, of immemorial and mysterious sanctity. Thus chastened and transfigured she won many hearts far beyond the boundaries of her native land. In that welter of religions which accompanied the decline of national life in antiquity her worship was one of the most popular at Rome and throughout the empire. Some of the Roman emperors themselves were openly addicted to it.<a href="#note_296" id="noteref_296" name="noteref_296"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">296</span></span></a> And however the religion of Isis may, like any other, have been often worn as a cloak by men and women of loose life, her rites appear on the whole to have been honourably distinguished by a dignity and composure, a solemnity and decorum well fitted to soothe the troubled mind, to ease the burdened heart. They appealed therefore to gentle spirits, and above all to women, whom the bloody and licentious rites of other Oriental goddesses only shocked and repelled. We need not wonder, then, that in a period of decadence, when traditional faiths were shaken, when systems clashed, when men's minds were disquieted, when the fabric of empire itself, once deemed eternal, began to show ominous rents and fissures, the serene figure of Isis with her spiritual calm, her gracious promise of immortality, should have appeared to many like a star in a stormy sky, and should have roused in their breasts a rapture of devotion not unlike that which was paid in the Middle Ages to the Virgin Mary. Indeed her stately ritual, with its shaven and tonsured priests, its matins and vespers, its tinkling music, its baptism and aspersions of holy water, its solemn processions, its jewelled images of the Mother of God, presented many points of similarity to the pomps and ceremonies of Catholicism.<a href="#note_297" id="noteref_297" name="noteref_297"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">297</span></span></a> The resemblance need not be purely accidental. <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page119">[pg 119]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg119" name="Pg119"/> Ancient Egypt may have contributed its share to the gorgeous symbolism of the Catholic Church as well as to the pale abstractions of her theology.<a href="#note_298" id="noteref_298" name="noteref_298"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">298</span></span></a> Certainly in art the figure of Isis suckling the infant Horus is so like that of the Madonna and child that it has sometimes received the adoration of ignorant Christians.<a href="#note_299" id="noteref_299" name="noteref_299"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">299</span></span></a> And to Isis in her later character of patroness of mariners the Virgin Mary perhaps owes her beautiful epithet of <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Stella Maris</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Star of the Sea,”</span> under which she is adored by tempest-tossed sailors.<a href="#note_300" id="noteref_300" name="noteref_300"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">300</span></span></a> The attributes of a marine deity may have been bestowed on Isis by the sea-faring Greeks of Alexandria. They are quite foreign to her original character and to the habits of the Egyptians, who had no love of the sea.<a href="#note_301" id="noteref_301" name="noteref_301"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">301</span></span></a> On this hypothesis Sirius, the bright star of Isis, which on July mornings rises from the glassy waves of the eastern Mediterranean, a harbinger of halcyon weather to mariners, was the true <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Stella Maris</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“the Star of the Sea.”</span></p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page120">[pg 120]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg120" name="Pg120"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
