<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4-2-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 4.00em; margin-top: 4.00em">
				<a id="toc101" name="toc101"/>
				<a id="pdf102" name="pdf102"/>
				<h2 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 2.88em; margin-top: 2.88em">
					<span style="font-size: 144%">Chapter V. The Hanged God.</span>
				</h2>
				<p>A reminiscence of the manner in which these old representatives of the deity were put to death is perhaps preserved in the famous story of Marsyas. He was said to be a Phrygian satyr or Silenus, according to others a shepherd or herdsman, who played sweetly on the flute. A friend of Cybele, he roamed the country with the disconsolate goddess to soothe her grief for the death of Attis.<a href="#note_867" id="noteref_867" name="noteref_867"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">867</span></span></a> The composition of the Mother's Air, a tune played on the flute in honour of the Great Mother Goddess, was attributed to him by the people of Celaenae in Phrygia.<a href="#note_868" id="noteref_868" name="noteref_868"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">868</span></span></a> Vain of his skill, he challenged Apollo to a musical contest, he to play on the flute and Apollo on the lyre. Being vanquished, Marsyas was tied up to a pine-tree and flayed or cut limb from limb either by the victorious Apollo or by a Scythian slave.<a href="#note_869" id="noteref_869" name="noteref_869"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">869</span></span></a> His skin was shown at Celaenae in historical times. It <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page289">[pg 289]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg289" name="Pg289"/> hung at the foot of the citadel in a cave from which the river Marsyas rushed with an impetuous and noisy tide to join the Maeander.<a href="#note_870" id="noteref_870" name="noteref_870"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">870</span></span></a> So the Adonis bursts full-born from the precipices of the Lebanon; so the blue river of Ibreez leaps in a crystal jet from the red rocks of the Taurus; so the stream, which now rumbles deep underground, used to gleam for a moment on its passage from darkness to darkness in the dim light of the Corycian cave. In all these copious fountains, with their glad promise of fertility and life, men of old saw the hand of God and worshipped him beside the rushing river with the music of its tumbling waters in their ears. At Celaenae, if we can trust tradition, the piper Marsyas, hanging in his cave, had a soul for harmony even in death; for it is said that at the sound of his native Phrygian melodies the skin of the dead satyr used to thrill, but that if the musician struck up an air in praise of Apollo it remained deaf and motionless.<a href="#note_871" id="noteref_871" name="noteref_871"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">871</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In this Phrygian satyr, shepherd, or herdsman who enjoyed the friendship of Cybele, practised the music so characteristic of her rites,<a href="#note_872" id="noteref_872" name="noteref_872"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">872</span></span></a> and died a violent death on her sacred tree, the pine, may we not detect a close resemblance to Attis, the favourite shepherd or herdsman of the goddess, who is himself described as a piper,<a href="#note_873" id="noteref_873" name="noteref_873"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">873</span></span></a> is said to have perished under a pine-tree, and was annually represented by an effigy hung, like Marsyas, upon a pine? We may conjecture that in old days the priest who bore the name and played the part of Attis at the spring festival of Cybele was regularly hanged or otherwise slain upon the sacred tree, and that this barbarous custom was afterwards mitigated into the form in which it is known to us in later times, when the priest merely drew blood from his body under the tree and attached an effigy instead of himself to its trunk. In the holy grove at Upsala men and animals were sacrificed by <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page290">[pg 290]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg290" name="Pg290"/> being hanged upon the sacred trees.<a href="#note_874" id="noteref_874" name="noteref_874"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">874</span></span></a> The human victims dedicated to Odin were regularly put to death by hanging or by a combination of hanging and stabbing, the man being strung up to a tree or a gallows and then wounded with a spear. Hence Odin was called the Lord of the Gallows or the God of the Hanged, and he is represented sitting under a gallows tree.<a href="#note_875" id="noteref_875" name="noteref_875"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">875</span></span></a> Indeed he is said to have been sacrificed to himself in the ordinary way, as we learn from the weird verses of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Havamal</span></span>, in which the god describes how he acquired his divine power by learning the magic runes:</p>
				<div class="block tei tei-quote" style="margin-bottom: 1.80em; margin-left: 3.60em; margin-top: 1.80em; margin-right: 3.60em">
					<div class="tei tei-lg" style="margin-bottom: 0.90em; margin-top: 0.90em">
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%">“</span>
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">I know that I hung on the windy tree</span>
								</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">For nine whole nights,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
								<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Wounded with the spear, dedicated to Odin,</span>
							</span>
						</div>
						<div class="tei tei-l" style="text-align: left">
							<span class="tei tei-q" style="text-align: left">
								<span class="tei tei-hi" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 90%; font-style: italic">Myself to myself.</span>
								</span>
								<span style="font-size: 90%">”</span>
							</span><a href="#note_876" id="noteref_876" name="noteref_876">
								<span class="tei tei-noteref" style="text-align: left">
									<span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">876</span>
								</span>
							</a>
						</div>
					</div>
				</div>
				<p>The Bagobos of Mindanao, one of the Philippine Islands, used annually to sacrifice human victims for the good of the crops in a similar way. Early in December, when the <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page291">[pg 291]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg291" name="Pg291"/> constellation Orion appeared at seven o'clock in the evening, the people knew that the time had come to clear their fields for sowing and to sacrifice a slave. The sacrifice was presented to certain powerful spirits as payment for the good year which the people had enjoyed, and to ensure the favour of the spirits for the coming season. The victim was led to a great tree in the forest; there he was tied with his back to the tree and his arms stretched high above his head, in the attitude in which ancient artists portrayed Marsyas hanging on the fatal tree. While he thus hung by the arms, he was slain by a spear thrust through his body at the level of the armpits. Afterwards the body was cut clean through the middle at the waist, and the upper part was apparently allowed to dangle for a little from the tree, while the under part wallowed in blood on the ground. The two portions were finally cast into a shallow trench beside the tree. Before this was done, anybody who wished might cut off a piece of flesh or a lock of hair from the corpse and carry it to the grave of some relation whose body was being consumed by a ghoul. Attracted by the fresh corpse, the ghoul would leave the mouldering old body in peace. These sacrifices have been offered by men now living.<a href="#note_877" id="noteref_877" name="noteref_877"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">877</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In Greece the great goddess Artemis herself appears to have been annually hanged in effigy in her sacred grove of Condylea among the Arcadian hills, and there accordingly she went by the name of the Hanged One.<a href="#note_878" id="noteref_878" name="noteref_878"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">878</span></span></a> Indeed a trace of a similar rite may perhaps be detected even at Ephesus, the most famous of her sanctuaries, in the legend of a woman who hanged herself and was thereupon dressed by the compassionate goddess in her own divine garb and called by the name of Hecate.<a href="#note_879" id="noteref_879" name="noteref_879"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">879</span></span></a> Similarly, at Melite in Phthia, a story <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page292">[pg 292]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg292" name="Pg292"/> was told of a girl named Aspalis who hanged herself, but who appears to have been merely a form of Artemis. For after her death her body could not be found, but an image of her was discovered standing beside the image of Artemis, and the people bestowed on it the title of Hecaerge or Far-shooter, one of the regular epithets of the goddess. Every year the virgins sacrificed a young goat to the image by hanging it, because Astypalis was said to have hanged herself.<a href="#note_880" id="noteref_880" name="noteref_880"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">880</span></span></a> The sacrifice may have been a substitute for hanging an image or a human representative of Artemis. Again, in Rhodes the fair Helen was worshipped under the title of Helen of the Tree, because the queen of the island had caused her handmaids, disguised as Furies, to string her up to a bough.<a href="#note_881" id="noteref_881" name="noteref_881"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">881</span></span></a> That the Asiatic Greeks sacrificed animals in this fashion is proved by coins of Ilium, which represent an ox or cow hanging on a tree and stabbed with a knife by a man, who sits among the branches or on the animal's back.<a href="#note_882" id="noteref_882" name="noteref_882"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">882</span></span></a> At Hierapolis also the victims were hung on trees before they were burnt.<a href="#note_883" id="noteref_883" name="noteref_883"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">883</span></span></a> With these Greek and Scandinavian parallels before us we can hardly dismiss as wholly improbable <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page293">[pg 293]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg293" name="Pg293"/> the conjecture that in Phrygia a man-god may have hung year by year on the sacred but fatal tree.</p>
				<p>The tradition that Marsyas was flayed and that his skin was exhibited at Celaenae down to historical times may well reflect a ritual practice of flaying the dead god and hanging his skin upon the pine as a means of effecting his resurrection, and with it the revival of vegetation in spring. Similarly, in ancient Mexico the human victims who personated gods were often flayed and their bloody skins worn by men who appear to have represented the dead deities come to life again.<a href="#note_884" id="noteref_884" name="noteref_884"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">884</span></span></a> When a Scythian king died, he was buried in a grave along with one of his concubines, his cup-bearer, cook, groom, lacquey, and messenger, who were all killed for the purpose, and a great barrow was heaped up over the grave. A year afterwards fifty of his servants and fifty of his best horses were strangled; and their bodies, having been disembowelled and cleaned out, were stuffed with chaff, sewn up, and set on scaffolds round about the barrow, every dead man bestriding a dead horse, which was bitted and bridled as in life.<a href="#note_885" id="noteref_885" name="noteref_885"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">885</span></span></a> These strange horsemen were no doubt supposed to mount guard over the king. The setting up of their stuffed skins might be thought to ensure their ghostly resurrection.</p>
				<p>That some such notion was entertained by the Scythians is made probable by the account which the mediaeval traveller de Plano Carpini gives of the funeral customs of the Mongols. The traveller tells us that when a noble Mongol died, the custom was to bury him seated in the middle of a tent, along with a horse saddled and bridled, and a mare and her foal. Also they used to eat another horse, stuff the carcase with straw, and set it up on poles. All this they did in order that in the other world the dead man might have a tent to live in, a mare to yield milk, and a steed to ride, and that he might be able to breed horses. Moreover, the bones of the horse which they ate were burned for the good of his soul.<a href="#note_886" id="noteref_886" name="noteref_886"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">886</span></span></a> When the Arab traveller Ibn Batuta visited Peking in the fourteenth century, <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page294">[pg 294]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg294" name="Pg294"/> he witnessed the funeral of an emperor of China who had been killed in battle. The dead sovereign was buried along with four young female slaves and six guards in a vault, and an immense mound like a hill was piled over him. Four horses were then made to run round the hillock till they could run no longer, after which they were killed, impaled, and set up beside the tomb.<a href="#note_887" id="noteref_887" name="noteref_887"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">887</span></span></a> When an Indian of Patagonia dies, he is buried in a pit along with some of his property. Afterwards his favourite horse, having been killed, skinned, and stuffed, is propped up on sticks with its head turned towards the grave. At the funeral of a chief four horses are sacrificed, and one is set up at each corner of the burial-place. The clothes and other effects of the deceased are burned; and to conclude all, a feast is made of the horses' flesh.<a href="#note_888" id="noteref_888" name="noteref_888"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">888</span></span></a> The Scythians certainly believed in the existence of the soul after death and in the possibility of turning it to account. This is proved by the practice of one of their tribes, the Taurians of the Crimea, who used to cut off the heads of their prisoners and set them on poles over their houses, especially over the chimneys, in order that the spirits of the slain men might guard the dwellings.<a href="#note_889" id="noteref_889" name="noteref_889"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">889</span></span></a> Some of the savages of Borneo allege a similar reason for their favourite custom of taking human heads. <span class="tei tei-q">“The custom,”</span> said a Kayan chief, <span class="tei tei-q">“is not horrible. It is an ancient custom, a good, beneficent custom, bequeathed to us <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page295">[pg 295]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg295" name="Pg295"/> by our fathers and our fathers' fathers; it brings us blessings, plentiful harvests, and keeps off sickness and pains. Those who were once our enemies, hereby become our guardians, our friends, our benefactors.”</span><a href="#note_890" id="noteref_890" name="noteref_890"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">890</span></span></a> Thus to convert dead foes into friends and allies all that is necessary is to feed and otherwise propitiate their skulls at a festival when they are brought into the village. <span class="tei tei-q">“An offering of food is made to the heads, and their spirits, being thus appeased, cease to entertain malice against, or to seek to inflict injury upon, those who have got possession of the skull which formerly adorned the now forsaken body.”</span><a href="#note_891" id="noteref_891" name="noteref_891"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">891</span></span></a> When the Sea Dyaks of Sarawak return home successful from a head-hunting expedition, they bring the head ashore with much ceremony, wrapt in palm leaves. <span class="tei tei-q">“On shore and in the village, the head, for months after its arrival, is treated with the greatest consideration, and all the names and terms of endearment of which their language is capable are abundantly lavished on it; the most dainty morsels, culled from their abundant though inelegant repast, are thrust into its mouth, and it is instructed to hate its former friends, and that, having been now adopted into the tribe of its captors, its spirit must be always with them; sirih leaves and betel-nut are given to it, and finally a cigar is frequently placed between its ghastly and pallid lips. None of this disgusting mockery is performed with the intention of ridicule, but all to propitiate the spirit by kindness, and to procure its good wishes for the tribe, of whom it is now supposed to have become a member.”</span><a href="#note_892" id="noteref_892" name="noteref_892"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">892</span></span></a> Amongst these Dyaks the <span class="tei tei-q">“Head-Feast,”</span> which has been just described, is supposed to be the most beneficial in its <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page296">[pg 296]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg296" name="Pg296"/> influence of all their feasts and ceremonies. <span class="tei tei-q">“The object of them all is to make their rice grow well, to cause the forest to abound with wild animals, to enable their dogs and snares to be successful in securing game, to have the streams swarm with fish, to give health and activity to the people themselves, and to ensure fertility to their women. All these blessings, the possessing and feasting of a fresh head are supposed to be the most efficient means of securing. The very ground itself is believed to be benefited and rendered fertile, more fertile even than when the water in which fragments of gold presented by the Rajah have been washed, has been sprinkled over it.”</span><a href="#note_893" id="noteref_893" name="noteref_893"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">893</span></span></a></p>
				<p>In like manner, if my conjecture is right, the man who represented the father-god of Phrygia used to be slain and his stuffed skin hung on the sacred pine in order that his spirit might work for the growth of the crops, the multiplication of animals, and the fertility of women. So at Athens an ox, which appears to have embodied the corn-spirit, was killed at an annual sacrifice, and its hide, stuffed with straw and sewn up, was afterwards set on its feet and yoked to a plough as if it were ploughing, apparently in order to represent, or rather to promote, the resurrection of the slain <span class="tei tei-pb" id="page297">[pg 297]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg297" name="Pg297"/> corn-spirit at the end of the threshing.<a href="#note_894" id="noteref_894" name="noteref_894"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">894</span></span></a> This employment of the skins of divine animals for the purpose of ensuring the revival of the slaughtered divinity might be illustrated by other examples.<a href="#note_895" id="noteref_895" name="noteref_895"><span class="tei tei-noteref"><span style="font-size: 60%; vertical-align: super">895</span></span></a> Perhaps the hide of the bull which was killed to furnish the regenerating bath of blood in the rites of Attis may have been put to a similar use.</p>
			</div>
			<span class="tei tei-pb" id="page298">[pg 298]</span><a class="tei tei-anchor" id="Pg298" name="Pg298"/>
			<hr class="page"/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
