<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes-5-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Footnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-7-2-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. E. Gover, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Pongol Festival in Southern India,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, N.S., v. (1870) pp. 96 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), ii. 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Captain G. R. Hearn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Passing through the Fire at Phalon,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Man</span></span>, v. (1905) pp. 154 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> On the custom of walking through fire, or rather over a furnace, see Andrew Lang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Modern Mythology</span></span> (London, 1897), pp. 148-175; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Athenaeum</span></span>, 26th August and 14th October, 1899; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xii. (1901) pp. 452-455; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xiv. (1903) pp. 87-89. Mr. Lang was the first to call attention to the wide prevalence of the rite in many parts of the world.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pandit Janardan Joshi, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Indian Notes and Queries</span></span>, iii. pp. 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 199 (September, 1893); W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), ii. 318 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Atkinson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the History of Religion in the Himalayas of the N.W. Provinces,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span>, liii. Part i. (Calcutta, 1884) p. 60. Compare W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), ii. 313 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 136 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Schlegel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Uranographie Chinoise</span></span> (The Hague and Leyden, 1875), pp. 143 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“La fête de fouler le feu célébrée en Chine et par les Chinois à Java,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, ix. (1896) pp. 193-195. Compare J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, vi. (Leyden, 1910) pp. 1292 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to Professor Schlegel, the connexion between this festival and the old custom of solemnly extinguishing and relighting the fire in spring is unquestionable.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, p. 262.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(Sir) H. H. Risley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes and Castes of Bengal, Ethnographic Glossary</span></span> (Calcutta, 1891-1892), i. 255 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), i. 19; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</span></span> (Calcutta, 1896), ii. 355. According to Sir Herbert Risley, the trench filled with smouldering ashes is so narrow (only a span and a quarter wide) <span class="tei tei-q">“that very little dexterity would enable a man to walk with his feet on either edge, so as not to touch the smouldering ashes at the bottom.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</span></span>, ii. 82.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. J. Walhouse, <span class="tei tei-q">“Passing through the Fire,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, vii. (1878) pp. 126 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare J. A. Dubois, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des Peuples de l'Inde</span></span> (Paris, 1825), ii. 373; E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), pp. 471-486; G. F. D'Penha, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xxxi. (1902) p. 392; <span class="tei tei-q">“Fire-walking in Ganjam,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Madras Government Museum Bulletin</span></span>, vol. iv. No. 3 (Madras, 1903), pp. 214-216. At Akka timanhully, one of the many villages which help to make up the town of Bangalore in Southern India, one woman at least from every house is expected to walk through the fire at the village festival. Captain J. S. F. Mackenzie witnessed the ceremony in 1873. A trench, four feet long by two feet wide, was filled with live embers. The priest walked through it thrice, and the women afterwards passed through it in batches. Capt. Mackenzie remarks: <span class="tei tei-q">“From the description one reads of walking through fire, I expected something sensational. Nothing could be more tame than the ceremony we saw performed; in which there never was nor ever could be the slightest danger to life. Some young girl, whose soles were tender, might next morning find that she had a blister, but this would be the extent of harm she could receive.”</span> See Captain J. S. F. Mackenzie, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Village Feast,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, iii. (1874) pp. 6-9. But to fall on the hot embers might result in injuries which would prove fatal, and such an accident is known to have occurred at a village in Bengal. See H. J. Stokes, <span class="tei tei-q">“Walking through Fire,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, ii. (1873) pp. 190 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> At Afkanbour, five days' march from Delhi, the Arab traveller Ibn Batutah saw a troop of fakirs dancing and even rolling on the glowing embers of a wood fire. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages d'Ibn Batoutah</span></span> (Paris, 1853-1858), ii. 6 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, iii. 439.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sonnerat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage aux Indes orientales et à la Chine</span></span> (Paris, 1782), i. 247 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Madras Government Museum, Bulletin</span></span>, vol. iv. No. 1 (Madras, 1901), pp. 55-59; E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), pp. 471-474. One of the places where the fire-festival in honour of Draupadi takes place annually is the Allandur Temple, at St. Thomas's Mount, near Madras. Compare <span class="tei tei-q">“Fire-walking Ceremony at the Dharmaraja Festival,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Quarterly Journal of the Mythic Society</span></span>, vol. ii. No. 1 (October, 1910), pp. 29-32.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1909), i. 98 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), pp. 476 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1909), i. 100 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Metz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tribes inhabiting the Neilgherry Hills</span></span>, Second Edition (Mangalore, 1864), p. 55.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“A Japanese Fire-walk,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Anthropologist</span></span>, New Series, v. (1903) pp. 377-380. The ceremony has been described to me by two eye-witnesses, Mr. Ernest Foxwell of St. John's College, Cambridge, and Miss E. P. Hughes, formerly Principal of the Teachers' Training College, Cambridge. Mr. Foxwell examined the feet of the performers both before and after their passage through the fire and found no hurt. The heat was so great that the sweat ran down him as he stood near the bed of glowing charcoal. He cannot explain the immunity of the performers. He informs me that the American writer Percival Lowell walked in the fire and was burned so severely that he was laid up in bed for three weeks; while on the other hand a Scotch engineer named Hillhouse passed over the hot charcoal unscathed. Several of Miss Hughes's Japanese pupils also went through the ordeal with impunity, but one of them burned a toe. Both before and after walking through the fire the people dipped their feet in a white stuff which Miss Hughes was told was salt. Compare W. G. Aston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Shinto</span></span> (London, 1905), p. 348: <span class="tei tei-q">“At the present day plunging the hand into boiling water, walking barefoot over a bed of live coals, and climbing a ladder formed of sword-blades set edge upwards are practised, not by way of ordeal, but to excite the awe and stimulate the piety of the ignorant spectators.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Basil Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">South Sea Yarns</span></span> (Edinburgh and London, 1894), pp. 195-207. Compare F. Arthur Jackson, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Fijian Legend of the Origin of the <i>Vilavilairevo</i> or Fire Ceremony,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Polynesian Society</span></span>, vol. iii. No. 2 (June, 1894), pp. 72-75; R. Fulton, <span class="tei tei-q">“An Account of the Fiji Fire-walking Ceremony, or <i>Vilavilairevo</i>, with a probable explanation of the mystery,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute</span></span>, xxxv. (1902) pp. 187-201; Lieutenant Vernon H. Haggard, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xiv. (1903) pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. P. Langley, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Fire-walk Ceremony in Tahiti,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1901</span></span> (Washington, 1902), pp. 539-544; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xiv. (1901) pp. 446-452; <span class="tei tei-q">“More about Fire-walking,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Polynesian Society</span></span>, vol. x. No. 1 (March, 1901), pp. 53 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Modern Mythology</span></span> (pp. 162-165) Andrew Lang quotes from <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Polynesian Society's Journal</span></span>, vol. ii. No. 2, pp. 105-108, an account of the fire-walk by Miss Tenira Henry, which seems to refer to Raiatea, one of the Tahitian group of islands.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de l'Association de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, lxix. (1897) pp. 130-133. But in the ceremony here described the chief performer was a native of Huahine, one of the Tahitian group of islands. The wood burned in the furnace was hibiscus and native chestnut (<i xml:lang="la">Inocarpus edulis</i>). Before stepping on the hot stones the principal performer beat the edge of the furnace twice or thrice with <i>ti</i> leaves (dracaena).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Missions Catholiques</span></span>, x. (1878) pp. 141 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. Lang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Modern Mythology</span></span>, p. 167, quoting Mr. Henry R. St. Clair.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Kolben, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Present State of the Cape of Good Hope</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1738), i. 129-133.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Nandi</span></span> (Oxford, 1909), pp. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Joseph Shooter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kafirs of Natal</span></span> (London, 1857), p. 35.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diego de Landa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relation des choses de Yucatan</span></span> (Paris, 1864), pp. 231, 233.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 89, 134 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> vii. 19; Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> xi. 784 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> with the comment of Servius; Strabo, v. 2. 9, p. 226; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Rom.</span></span> iii. 32. From a reference to the custom in Silius Italicus (v. 175 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) it seems that the men passed thrice through the furnace holding the entrails of the sacrificial victims in their hands. The learned but sceptical Varro attributed their immunity in the fire to a drug with which they took care to anoint the soles of their feet before they planted them in the furnace. See Varro, cited by Servius, on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> xi. 787. The whole subject has been treated by W. Mannhardt (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, Berlin, 1877, pp. 327 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), who compares the rites of these <span class="tei tei-q">“Soranian Wolves”</span> with the ceremonies performed by the brotherhood of the Green Wolf at Jumièges in Normandy. See above, vol. i. pp. 185 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Preller (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 268), following G. Curtius, would connect the first syllable of Soranus and Soracte with the Latin <i xml:lang="la">sol</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“sun.”</span> However, this etymology appears to be at the best very doubtful. My friend Prof. J. H. Moulton doubts whether <i>Soranus</i> can be connected with <i xml:lang="la">sol</i>; he tells me that the interchange of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l</span></span> and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">r</span></span> is rare. He would rather connect <i>Soracte</i> with the Greek ὕραξ, <span class="tei tei-q">“a shrew-mouse.”</span> In that case Apollo Soranus might be the equivalent of the Greek Apollo Smintheus, <span class="tei tei-q">“the Mouse Apollo.”</span> Professor R. S. Conway also writes to me (11th November 1902) that <i>Soranus</i> and <i>Soracte</i> <span class="tei tei-q">“have nothing to do with <i xml:lang="la">sol</i>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">r</span></span> and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l</span></span> are not confused in Italic.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, xxvi. 11. About this time the Carthaginian army encamped only three miles from Rome, and Hannibal in person, at the head of two thousand cavalry, rode close up to the walls and leisurely reconnoitered them. See Livy, xxvi. 10; Polybius, ix. 5-7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg001">1</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg015">15</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg013">13</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg008">8</a>, compare p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg003">3</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, i. (Leyden, 1892), p. 355; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> vi. (Leyden, 1910) p. 942.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. H. Gray, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">China</span></span> (London, 1878), i. 287, 305; J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 32, vi. 942.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 137, vi. 942.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Gmelin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reise durch Sibirien</span></span> (Göttingen, 1751-1752), i. 333.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. L. Priklonski, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ueber das Schamenthum bei den Jakuten,”</span> in A. Bastian's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</span></span> (Berlin, 1888), i. 219. Compare Vasilij Priklonski, <span class="tei tei-q">“Todtengebräuche der Jakuten,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lix. (1891) p. 85.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. H. Louis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gates of Thibet</span></span> (Calcutta, 1894), p. 116.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Allegret, <span class="tei tei-q">“Les Idées religieuses des Fañ (Afrique Occidentale),”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, l. (1904) p. 220.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</span></span> (London, 1890), p. 160.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. 162, 163, 211, 212, 214, 215, 217.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the references above, vol. i. p. 342 note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the references above, vol. i. p. 342 note 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 52 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 127; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Scapegoat</span></span>, pp. 157 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare R. Kühnau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schlesische Sagen</span></span> (Berlin, 1910-1913), iii. p. 69, No. 1428: <span class="tei tei-q">“In the county of Glatz the people believe that on Walpurgis Night (the Eve of May Day) the witches under cover of the darkness seek to harm men in all sorts of ways. To guard themselves against them the people set small birch trees in front of the house-door on the previous day, and are of opinion that the witches must count all the leaves on these little trees before they can get into the house. While they are still at this laborious task, the day dawns and the dreaded guests must retire to their own realm”</span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, iii. p. 39, No. 1394: <span class="tei tei-q">“On St. John's Night (between the 23rd and 24th of June) the witches again busily bestir themselves to force their way into the houses of men and the stalls of cattle. People stick small twigs of oak in the windows and doors of the houses and cattle-stalls to keep out the witches. This is done in the neighbourhood of Patschkau and generally in the districts of Frankenstein, Münsterberg, Grottkau, and Neisse. In the same regions they hang garlands, composed of oak leaves intertwined with flowers, at the windows. The garland must be woven in the house itself and may not be carried over any threshold; it must be hung out of the window on a nail, which is inserted there.”</span> Similar evidence might be multiplied almost indefinitely.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Golden Bough</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1900), ii. 314-316.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 249 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 117, compare pp. 143, 144.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. p. 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 120, 167.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 115 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 116, 142, 173 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 185, 191, 192, 193, 209.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 116. But the effigy is called the Witch.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The chapter has since been expanded into the four volumes of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Scapegoat</span></span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, p. 262.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg009">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg010">10</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg014">14</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the Klings of Southern India the ceremony of walking over a bed of red-hot ashes is performed by a few chosen individuals, who are prepared for the rite by a devil-doctor or medicine-man. The eye-witness who describes the ceremony adds: <span class="tei tei-q">“As I understood it, they took on themselves and expiated the sins of the Kling community for the past year.”</span> See the letter of Stephen Ponder, quoted by Andrew Lang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Modern Mythology</span></span> (London, 1897), p. 160.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 205 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 216 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 186.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 148.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 233.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 194.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 524.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span> (Munich, 1860-1867), iii. 956; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 524. In the neighbourhood of Breitenbrunn the lad who collects fuel at this season has his face blackened and is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Charcoal Man”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria</span></span>, etc., ii. 261).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Birlinger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</span></span> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861-1862), ii. 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 146; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 524 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 428 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, §§ 120, 122; O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das festliche Jahr</span></span> (Leipsic, 1863), p. 194; J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), p. 176; J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 49, § 311; W. J. A. Tettau und J. D. H. Temme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Volkssagen Ost-preussens, Litthauens und West-preussens</span></span> (Berlin, 1837), pp. 277 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; K. Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span> (Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 48; R. Eisel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</span></span> (Gera, 1871), p. 31, Nr. 62.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span> (Iserlohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 34.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Feste und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</span></span> (Zurich, 1913), p. 163.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Badisches Volksleben</span></span> (Strasburg, 1900), p. 507.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">loc. cit.</span></span> Tacitus tells us that the image of the goddess Nerthus, her vestments, and chariot were washed in a certain lake, and that immediately afterwards the slaves who ministered to the goddess were swallowed by the lake (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, 40). The statement may perhaps be understood to mean that the slaves were drowned as a sacrifice to the deity. Certainly we know from Tacitus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, 9 and 39) that the ancient Germans offered human sacrifices.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 429, § 121.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Frh. von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span> (Prague, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 311.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Karl Lynker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen Gauen</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Cassel and Göttingen, 1860), pp. 253, 254, §§ 335, 336.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Badisches Volksleben</span></span> (Strasburg, 1900), p. 506.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Giuseppe Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span> (Palermo, 1881), p. 313.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 489 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, iii. 487; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 77 § 92; O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das festliche Jahr</span></span> (Leipsic, 1863), p. 193; F. J. Vonbun, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Chur, 1862), p. 133; P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 143 § 161; Karl Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span> (Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 248, No. 303; F. J. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 415; L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), pp. 261 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Paul Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore de France</span></span> (Paris, 1904-1907), ii. 160 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">British Popular Customs</span></span> (London, 1876), pp. 322 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 329 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For more evidence, see above, vol. i. pp. 193, 194, 205 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 208, 210, 216; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 204 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 420 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Monseur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folklore Wallon</span></span> (Brussels, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 130; P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore de France</span></span>, ii. 374 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Feste und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</span></span> (Zurich, 1913), p. 163. See above, p. 27.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Westermarck, <span class="tei tei-q">“Midsummer Customs in Morocco,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xvi. (1905) pp. 31 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, certain Dates of the Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco</span></span> (Helsingfors, 1913), pp. 84-86; E. Doutté, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magie et Religion dans l'Afrique du Nord</span></span> (Algiers, 1908), pp. 567 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> See also above, vol. i. p. 216.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 213-219.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Westermarck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, certain Dates of the Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco</span></span> (Helsingfors, 1913), pp. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This has been rightly pointed out by Dr. Edward Westermarck (<span class="tei tei-q">“Midsummer Customs in Morocco,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xvi. (1905) p. 46).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Caesar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bell. Gall.</span></span> vi. 15; Strabo, iv. 4. 5, p. 198; Diodorus Siculus, v. 32. See W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 525 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, iv. 4. 4, p. 197: τὰς δὲ φονικὰς δίκας μάλιστα τούτοις [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">i.e.</span></span> the Druids] ἐπετέτραπτο δικάζειν, ὅταν τε φορὰ τούτων ᾖ, φορὰν καὶ τῆς χώρας νομίζουσιν ὑπάρχειν. On this passage see W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 529 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; and below, pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Madame Clément, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des fêtes civiles et religieuses du département du Nord</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Cambrai, 1836), pp. 193-200; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span>, (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 323 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. W. Fairholt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gog and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall, their real and legendary History</span></span> (London, 1859), pp. 78-87; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 523, note. It is said that the giantess made her first appearance in 1665, and that the children were not added to the show till the end of the seventeenth century. In the eighteenth century the procession took place on the third Sunday in June, which must always have been within about a week of Midsummer Day (H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le dieu gaulois du soleil et le symbolisme de la roue,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue Archéologique</span></span>, iii. série iv. 32 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gentleman's Magazine</span></span>, xxix. (1759), pp. 263-265; Madame Clément, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des fêtes civiles et religieuses du département du Nord</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 169-175; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span>, pp. 328-332. Compare John Milner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The History, Civil and Ecclesiastical, and Survey of the Antiquities of Winchester</span></span> (Winchester, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), i. 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> note 6; John Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), i. 325 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; James Logan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Scottish Gael or Celtic Manners</span></span>, edited by Rev. Alex. Stewart (Inverness, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), ii. 358. According to the writer in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gentleman's Magazine</span></span> the name of the procession was the Cor-mass.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Madame Clément, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des fêtes civiles et religieuses</span></span>, etc., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">de la Belgique méridionale</span></span>, etc. (Avesnes, 1846), p. 252; Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 123-126. We may conjecture that the Flemish <i>Reuze</i>, like the <i>Reuss</i> of Dunkirk, is only another form of the German <i xml:lang="de">Riese</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“giant.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. W. Fairholt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gog and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall, their real and legendary History</span></span> (London, 1859), pp. 64-78. For the loan of this work and of the one cited in the next note I have to thank Mrs. Wherry, of St. Peter's Terrace, Cambridge.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Fourdin, <span class="tei tei-q">“La foire d'Ath,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales du Cercle Archéologique de Mons</span></span>, ix. (Mons, 1869) pp. 7, 8, 12, 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The history of the festival has been carefully investigated, with the help of documents by M. Fourdin. According to him, the procession was religious in its origin and took its rise from a pestilence which desolated Hainaut in 1215 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). He thinks that the effigies of giants were not introduced into the procession till between 1450 and 1460 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 8).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>George Puttenham, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Arte of English Poesie</span></span> (London, 1811, reprint of the original edition of London, 1589), book iii. chapter vi. p. 128. On the history of the English giants and their relation to those of the continent, see F. W. Fairholt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gog and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall, their real and legendary History</span></span> (London, 1859).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joseph Strutt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England</span></span>, New Edition, by W. Hone (London, 1834), pp. xliii.-xlv.; F. W. Fairholt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gog and Magog, the Giants in Guildhall</span></span> (London, 1859), pp. 52-59.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. W. Fairholt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 59-61.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. W. Fairholt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 61-63.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Felix Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Des Gervasius von Tilbury Otia Imperialia</span></span> (Hanover, 1856), pp. 212 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes, et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span>, pp. 354 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 514.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 514, 523.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Athenaeum</span></span>, 24th July 1869, p. 115; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 515 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> From a later account we learn that about the year 1890 the custom of lighting a bonfire and dancing round it was still observed at Bagnères de Luchon on Midsummer Eve, but the practice of burning live serpents in it had been discontinued. The fire was kindled by a priest. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xii. (1901) pp. 315-317.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Breuil, <span class="tei tei-q">“Du culte de St.-Jean Baptiste,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaires de Picardie</span></span>, viii. (1845) pp. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Collin de Plancy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionnaire Infernal</span></span> (Paris, 1825-1826), iii. 40; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span>, pp. 355 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. W. Wolf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Göttingen and Leipsic, 1852-1857), ii. 388; E. Cortet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Essai sur les Fêtes Religieuses</span></span> (Paris, 1867), pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Laisnel de la Salle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Croyances et Légendes du Centre de la France</span></span> (Paris, 1875), i. 82; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 515.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tessier, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires et Dissertations publiés par la Société Royale des Antiquaires de France</span></span>, v. (1823) p. 388; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 515.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexandre Bertrand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion des Gaulois</span></span> (Paris, 1897), p. 407.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 519; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 515.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 515; Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfesten, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span> (Iserlohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 34.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 515.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Meyrac, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions, Coutumes, Légendes, et Contes des Ardenness</span></span> (Charleville, 1890), p. 68.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 142.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, iv. 4. 5, p. 198, καὶ ἄλλα δὲ ἀνθρωποθυσιῶν εἴδη λέγεται; καὶ γὰρ κατετόξευόν τινας καὶ ἀνεσταύρουν ἐν τοῖς ἱεροῖς καὶ κατασκευάσαντες κολοσσὸν χόρτου καὶ ξύλων, ἐμβαλόντες εἰς τοῦτον βοσκήματα καὶ θηρία παντοῖα καὶ ἀνθρώπους ὡλοκαύτουν.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg039">39</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), pp. 214, 301 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Ulrich Jahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hexenwesen und Zauberei in Pommern</span></span> (Breslau, 1886), p. 7; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volkssagen aus Pommern und Rügen</span></span> (Stettin, 1886), p. 353, No. 446.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. p. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">n.</span></span> 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The treatment of magic and witchcraft by the Christian Church is described by W. E. H. Lecky, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of the Rise and Influence of the Spirit of Rationalism in Europe</span></span>, New Edition (London, 1882), i. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Four hundred witches were burned at one time in the great square of Toulouse (W. E. H. Lecky, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 38). Writing at the beginning of the eighteenth century Addison observes: <span class="tei tei-q">“Before I leave Switzerland I cannot but observe, that the notion of witchcraft reigns very much in this country. I have often been tired with accounts of this nature from very sensible men, who are most of them furnished with matters of fact which have happened, as they pretend, within the compass of their own knowledge. It is certain there have been many executions on this account, as in the canton of Berne there were some put to death during my stay at Geneva. The people are so universally infatuated with the notion, that if a cow falls sick, it is ten to one but an old woman is clapt up in prison for it, and if the poor creature chance to think herself a witch, the whole country is for hanging her up without mercy.”</span> See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Works of Joseph Addison</span></span>, with notes by R. Hurd, D.D. (London, 1811), vol. ii., <span class="tei tei-q">“Remarks on several Parts of Italy,”</span> p. 196.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, iv. 4. 4, p. 197. See the passage quoted above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg032">32</a>, note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 532-534.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 270-305.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some of the serpents worshipped by the old Prussians lived in hollow oaks, and as oaks were sacred among the Prussians, the serpents may possibly have been regarded as genii of the trees. See Simon Grunau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Preussischer Chronik</span></span>, herausgegeben von Dr. M. Perlbach, i. (Leipsic, 1876) p. 89; Christophor Hartknoch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alt und Neues Preussen</span></span> (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1684), pp. 143, 163. Serpents played an important part in the worship of Demeter, but we can hardly assume that they were regarded as embodiments of the goddess. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, in China the spirits of plants are thought to assume the form of snakes oftener than that of any other animal. Chinese literature abounds with stories illustrative of such transformations. See J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, iv. (Leyden, 1901) pp. 283-286. In Siam the spirit of the <i>takhien</i> tree is said to appear sometimes in the shape of a serpent and sometimes in that of a woman. See Adolph Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Voelker des Oestlichen Asien</span></span>, iii. (Jena, 1867) p. 251. The vipers that haunted the balsam trees in Arabia were regarded by the Arabs as sacred to the trees (Pausanias, ix. 28. 4); and once in Arabia, when a wood hitherto untouched by man was burned down to make room for the plough, certain white snakes flew out of it with loud lamentations. No doubt they were supposed to be the dispossessed spirits of the trees. See J. Wellhausen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reste Arabischen Heidentums</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1897), pp. 108 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. L. M. Noguès, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les mœurs d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</span></span> (Saintes, 1891), p. 71. Amongst the superstitious practices denounced by the French writer J. B. Thiers in the seventeenth century was <span class="tei tei-q">“the gathering of certain herbs between the Eve of St. John and the Eve of St. Peter and keeping them in a bottle to heal certain maladies.”</span> See J. B. Thiers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traité des Superstitions</span></span> (Paris, 1679), p. 321.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jules Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887), ii. 8, 244; Amélie Bosquet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Normandie romanesque et merveilleuse</span></span> (Paris and Rouen, 1845), p. 294.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De la Loubere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Du Royaume de Siam</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 202. The writer here mentions an Italian mode of divination practised on Midsummer Eve. People washed their feet in wine and threw the wine out of the window. After that, the first words they heard spoken by passers-by were deemed oracular.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aubin-Louis Millin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage dans les Départements du Midi de la France</span></span> (Paris, 1807-1811), iii. 344 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexandre Bertrand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion des Gaulois</span></span> (Paris, 1897), p. 124. In French the name of St. John's herb (<i xml:lang="fr">herbe de la Saint-Jean</i>) is usually given to <i xml:lang="la">millepertius</i>, that is, St. John's wort, which is quite a different flower. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg054">54</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> But <span class="tei tei-q">“St. John's herb”</span> may well be a general term which in different places is applied to different plants.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bruno Stehle, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aberglauben, Sitten und Gebräuche in Lothringen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lix. (1891) p. 379.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. F. Sauvé, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</span></span> (Paris, 1889), pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wald, Bäume, Kräuter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, i. (1853) pp. 332 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 158, §§ 1345, 1348.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Christian Schneller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 237, § 24.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Schmitz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten und Bräuche, Lieder, Sprüchwörter und Räthsel des Eifler Volkes</span></span> (Treves, 1856-1858), i. 40.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Schmitz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 42.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Märkische Sagen und Märchen</span></span> (Berlin, 1843), p. 330.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii. p. 287, § 1436.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. von Schulenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald</span></span> (Leipsic, 1880), p. 254.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Prätorius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deliciae Prussicae</span></span> (Berlin, 1871), pp. 24 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Kaupole is probably identical in name with Kupole or Kupalo, as to whom see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 261 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alois John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</span></span> (Prague, 1905), p. 86.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. F. Kaindl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Huzulen</span></span> (Vienna, 1894), pp. 78, 90, 93, 105; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxvi. (1899) p. 256.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dr. F. Tetzner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Tschechen und Mährer in Schlesien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxviii. (1900) p. 340.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Holzmayer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Osiliana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, vii. Heft 2 (Dorpat, 1872), p. 62.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Einhorn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wiederlegunge der Abgötterey: der ander (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sic</span></span>) Theil,”</span> printed at Riga in 1627, and reprinted in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</span></span>, ii. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) pp. 651 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</span></span> (Dresden and Leipsic, 1841), ii. 26.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Strausz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Bulgaren</span></span> (Leipsic, 1898), pp. 348, 386.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</span></span> (Münster i. W., 1890), p. 34.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. F. Abbott, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Macedonian Folk-lore</span></span> (Cambridge, 1903), pp. 54, 58.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. A. Weddell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage dans le Nord de la Bolivie et dans les parties voisines du Pérou</span></span> (Paris and London, 1853), p. 181.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Westermarck, <span class="tei tei-q">“Midsummer Customs in Morocco,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xvi. (1905) p. 35; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, certain Dates of the Solar Year, and the Weather in Morocco</span></span> (Helsingfors, 1913), pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887), ii. 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1890), ii. 285.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), p. 376.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Freiherr von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span> (Prague, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 312.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">loc. cit.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben aus Masuren</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Danzig, 1867), p. 72.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">loc. cit.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch</span></span>, etc., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">im Voigtlande</span></span>, p. 376.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Lemke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</span></span> (Mohrungen, 1884-1887), i. 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 144 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 423.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 252.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben aus Masuren</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 72.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 71.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem inneren und äussern Leben der Ehsten</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1876), pp. 362 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), pp. 267 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Willibald Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), p. 264.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. von Schulenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wendisches Volksthum</span></span> (Berlin, 1882), p. 145.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span> (Iserlohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 145; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 100, § 134; I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wald, Bäume, Kräuter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, i. (1853) p. 329; A. Schlossar, <span class="tei tei-q">“Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube aus der deutschen Steiermark,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, N.R., xxiv. (1891) p. 387; E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 428; J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), i. 307, 312; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore of Plants</span></span> (London, 1889), pp. 62, 286; Rev. Hilderic Friend, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Flowers and Flower Lore</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1886), pp. 147, 149, 150, 540; G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), pp. 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span> (Palermo, 1881), p. 309. One authority lays down the rule that you should gather the plant fasting and in silence (J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 312). According to Sowerby, the <i xml:lang="la">Hypericum perforatum</i> flowers in England about July and August (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. v. London, 1796, p. 295). We should remember, however, that in the old calendar Midsummer Day fell twelve days later than at present. The reform of the calendar probably put many old floral superstitions out of joint.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bingley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tour round North Wales</span></span> (1800), ii. 237, quoted by T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">British Popular Customs</span></span> (London, 1876), p. 320. Compare Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 251: <span class="tei tei-q">“St. John's, or Midsummer Day, was an important festival. St. John's wort, gathered at noon on that day, was considered good for several complaints. The old saying went that if anybody dug the devil's bit at midnight on the eve of St. John, the roots were then good for driving the devil and witches away.”</span> Apparently by <span class="tei tei-q">“the devil's bit”</span> we are to understand St. John's wort.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. L. M. Noguès, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les mœurs d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</span></span> (Saintes, 1891), pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alois John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</span></span> (Prague, 1905), p. 84. They call the plant <span class="tei tei-q">“witch's herb”</span> (<i xml:lang="de">Hexenkraut</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. v. (London, 1796), p. 295.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span> (Iserlohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 35.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore of Plants</span></span> (London, 1889), p. 286; K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span>, ii. p. 291, § 1450<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">a</span></span>. The Germans of Bohemia ascribe wonderful virtues to the red juice extracted from the yellow flowers of St. John's wort (W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span>, Vienna and Olmütz, 1893, p. 264).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. p. 286, § 1433. The blood is also a preservative against many diseases (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. p. 290, § 1444).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Märkische Sagen und Märchen</span></span> (Berlin, 1843), p. 387, § 105.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Chemnitz, 1759), pp. 246 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfesten, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span>, p. 147.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Berthold Seeman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Viti, An Account of a Government Mission to the Vitian or Fijian Islands in the years 1860-61</span></span> (Cambridge, 1862), p. 63.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xvi. (London, 1803) p. 1093.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Seifart, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen, Schwänke und Gebräuche aus Stadt und Stift Hildesheim</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Hildesheim, 1889), p. 177, § 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. L. Rochholz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</span></span> (Berlin, 1867), i. 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 98, § 681.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 100, § 134.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), p. 376. The belief and practice are similar at Grün, near Asch, in Western Bohemia. See Alois John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</span></span> (Prague, 1905), p. 84.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii. 299; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, iii. (Munich, 1865), p. 342; I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 160, § 1363.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 1013; A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie des Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), i. 189 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Rev. Hilderic Friend, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Flowers and Flower Lore</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1886), p. 75. In England mugwort is very common in waste ground, hedges, and the borders of fields. It flowers throughout August and later. The root is woody and perennial. The smooth stems, three or four feet high, are erect, branched, and leafy, and marked by many longitudinal purplish ribs. The pinnatified leaves alternate on the stalk; they are smooth and dark green above, cottony and very white below. The flowers are in simple leafy spikes or clusters; the florets are purplish, furnished with five stamens and five awl-shaped female flowers, which constitute the radius. The whole plant has a weak aromatic scent and a slightly bitter flavour. Its medical virtues are of no importance. See James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, xiv. (London, 1802) p. 978. Altogether it is not easy to see why such an inconspicuous and insignificant flower should play so large a part in popular superstition. Mugwort (<i xml:lang="la">Artemisia vulgaris</i>) is not to be confounded with wormwood (<i xml:lang="la">Artemisia absinthium</i>), which is quite a different flower in appearance, though it belongs to the same genus. Wormwood is common in England, flowering about August. The flowers are in clusters, each of them broad, hemispherical, and drooping, with a buff-coloured disc. The whole plant is of a pale whitish green and clothed with a short silky down. It is remarkable for its intense bitterness united to a peculiar strong aromatic odour. It is often used to keep insects from clothes and furniture, and as a medicine is one of the most active bitters. See James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xviii. (London, 1804) p. 1230.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Breuil, <span class="tei tei-q">“Du culte de St.-Jean-Baptiste,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaires de Picardie</span></span>, viii. (1845) p. 224, note 1, quoting the curé of Manancourt, near Péronne.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Pineau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le folk-lore du Poitou</span></span> (Paris, 1892), p. 499.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), pp. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, §§ 635-637.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span>, i. p. 249, § 283; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 1013; I. V. Zingerle, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, i. (1853) p. 331. and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span> iv. (1859) p. 42 (quoting a work of the seventeenth century); F. J. Vonbun, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Chur, 1862), p. 133, note 1. See also above, vol. i. pp. 162, 163, 165, 174, 177.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie der Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), i. 190, quoting Du Cange.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 262.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jules Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1886), ii. 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joseph Train, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical and Statistical Account of the Isle of Man</span></span> (Douglas, Isle of Man, 1845), ii. 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 422.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, vi. (Leyden, 1910) p. 1079, compare p. 947.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> vi. 947.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> vi. 946 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. John Batchelor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ainu and their Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1901), p. 318, compare pp. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 329, 370, 372.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859) p. 42; Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste</span></span>, p. 141. The German name of mugwort (<i xml:lang="de">Beifuss</i>) is said to be derived from this superstition.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen, und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii. 290, § 1445.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste</span></span>, p. 141.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), i. 334 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, quoting Lupton, Thomas Hill, and Paul Barbette. A precisely similar belief is recorded with regard to wormwood (<i xml:lang="fr">armoise</i>) by the French writer J. B. Thiers, who adds that only small children and virgins could find the wonderful coal. See J. B. Thiers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traité des Superstitions</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Paris, 1741), i. 300. In Annam people think that wormwood puts demons to flight; hence they hang up bunches of its leaves in their houses at the New Year. See Paul Giran, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magie et Religion Annamites</span></span> (Paris, 1912), p. 118, compare pp. 185, 256.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Lemke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</span></span> (Mohrungen, 1884-1887), i. 21. As to mugwort (German <i xml:lang="de">Beifuss</i>, French <i xml:lang="fr">armoise</i>), see further A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie des Plantes</span></span>, ii. 16 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 356 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xix. (London, 1804) p. 1319.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Aubrey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Remains of Gentilisme and Judaisme</span></span> (London, 1881), pp. 25 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), i. 329 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Rev. Hilderic Friend, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Flowers and Flower Lore</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1886), p. 136; D. H. Moutray Read, <span class="tei tei-q">“Hampshire Folk-lore,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xxii. (1911) p. 325. Compare J. Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xix. (London, 1804), p. 1319: <span class="tei tei-q">“Like all succulent plants this is very tenacious of life, and will keep growing long after it has been torn from its native spot. The country people in Norfolk sometimes hang it up in their cottages, judging by its vigour of the health of some absent friend.”</span> It seems that in England the course of love has sometimes been divined by means of sprigs of red sage placed in a basin of rose-water on Midsummer Eve (J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 333).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben aus Masuren</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Danzig, 1867), pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 176, § 487; E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Feste und Bräuche des Schweizervolkes</span></span> (Zurich, 1913), p. 163. In Switzerland the species employed for this purpose on Midsummer day is <i xml:lang="la">Sedum reflexum</i>. The custom is reported from the Emmenthal. In Germany a root of orpine, dug up on St. John's morning and hung between the shoulders, is sometimes thought to be a cure for hemorrhoids (Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste</span></span>, p. 145). Perhaps the <span class="tei tei-q">“oblong, tapering, fleshy, white lumps”</span> of the roots (J. Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xix. London, 1804, p. 1319) are thought to bear some likeness to the hemorrhoids, and to heal them on the principle that the remedy should resemble the disease.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 162, 163, 165. In England vervain (<i xml:lang="la">Verbena officinalis</i>) grows not uncommonly by road sides, in dry sunny pastures, and in waste places about villages. It flowers in July. The flowers are small and sessile, the corolla of a very pale lilac hue, its tube enclosing the four short curved stamens. The root of the plant, worn by a string round the neck, is an old superstitious medicine for scrofulous disorders. See James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xi. (London, 1800) p. 767.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dr. Otero Acevado, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Temps</span></span>, September 1898. See above, vol. i. p. 208, note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 422.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span>, p. 262; Amélie Bosquet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Normandie romanesque et merveilleuse</span></span>, p. 294; J. Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span>, i. 287, ii. 8. In Saintonge and Aunis the plant was gathered on Midsummer Eve for the purpose of evoking or exorcising spirits (J. L. M. Noguès, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les mœurs d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</span></span>, p. 72).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span>, p. 207, § 1437.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 177, citing Chambers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Edinburgh Journal</span></span>, 2nd July 1842.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 107, § 919.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Laisnel de la Salle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Croyances et Légendes du Centre de la France</span></span> (Paris, 1875), i. 288.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. L. M. Noguès, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les mœurs d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</span></span>, pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span>, i. 423.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Kolbe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hessische Volks-Sitten und Gebräuche</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Marburg, 1888), p. 72; Sophus Bugge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studien über die Entstehung der nordischen Götter- und Heldensagen</span></span> (Munich, 1889), pp. 35, 295 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Fr. Kauffmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder</span></span> (Strasburg, 1902), pp. 45, 61. The flowers of common camomile (<i xml:lang="la">Anthemis nobilis</i>) are white with a yellow disk, which in time becomes conical. The whole plant is intensely bitter, with a peculiar but agreeable smell. As a medicine it is useful for stomachic troubles. In England it does not generally grow wild. See James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xiv. (London, 1802) p. 980.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 177, § 488.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben aus Masuren</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Danzig, 1867), p. 71.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Witzschel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</span></span> (Vienna, 1878), p. 289, § 139.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. J. A. von Tettau und J. D. H. Temme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</span></span> (Berlin, 1837), p. 283.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. vii. (London, 1798), p. 487. As to great mullein or high taper, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, vol. viii. (London, 1799), p. 549.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tettau und Temme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">loc. cit.</span></span> As to mullein at Midsummer, see also above, vol. i. pp. 190, 191.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span>, p. 205, § 1426.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 93, § 648.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), p. 377.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alois John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</span></span> (Prague, 1905), p. 84.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Sagen Tirols</span></span> (Zurich, 1857), p. 397.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Russwurm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aberglaube aus Russland,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859) pp. 153 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The purple loosestrife is one of our most showy English wild plants. In July and August it may be seen flowering on the banks of rivers, ponds, and ditches. The separate flowers are in axillary whorls, which together form a loose spike of a reddish variable purple. See James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, vol. xv. (London, 1802) p. 1061.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities</span></span>, i. 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Hilderic Friend, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Flowers and Flower Lore</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1886), pp. 60, 78, 150, 279-283; Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F. Jackson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Shropshire Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1883), p. 242; Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), pp. 89 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. B. Thiers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traité des Superstitions</span></span> (Paris, 1679), p. 314; J. Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span>, i. 290; P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1886), p. 217; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions et Superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1882), ii. 336; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), pp. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 123; F. J. Vonbun, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Chur, 1862), pp. 133 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfesten</span></span>, p. 144; K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span>, ii. 288, § 1437; M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben aus Masuren</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 72; A. Schlossar, <span class="tei tei-q">“Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube aus der deutschen Steiermark,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, N.R., xxiv. (1891) p. 387; Theodor Vernaleken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Oesterreich</span></span> (Vienna, 1859), p. 309; J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Sagen Tirols</span></span> (Zurich, 1857), pp. 407 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 103, § 882, p. 158, § 1350; Christian Schneller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 237; J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span>, p. 97, §§ 673-677; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</span></span> (Prague, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 311 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 265; R. F. Kaindl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Huzulen</span></span> (Vienna, 1894), p. 106; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxvi. (1899) p. 275; P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), i. 142, § 159; G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), p. 161; C. Russwurm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aberglaube in Russland,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859) pp. 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie des Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 144 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The practice of gathering ferns or fern seed on the Eve of St. John was forbidden by the synod of Ferrara in 1612. See J. B. Thiers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traité des Superstitions</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Paris, 1741), i. 299 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In a South Slavonian story we read how a cowherd understood the language of animals, because fern-seed accidentally fell into his shoe on Midsummer Day (F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven</span></span>, Leipsic, 1883-1884, ii. 424 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, No. 159). On this subject I may refer to my article, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Language of Animals,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Archaeological Review</span></span>, i. (1888) pp. 164 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 97, §§ 673, 675.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859) pp. 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie des Plantes</span></span>, ii. 146.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Longworth Dames and E. Seemann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Folk-lore of the Azores,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xiv. (1903) pp. 142 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>August Witzschel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</span></span> (Vienna, 1878), p. 275, § 82.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), p. 265; K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span>, ii. p. 285, § 1431, p. 288, § 1439; J. Napier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore, or Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland</span></span> (Paisley, 1879), p. 125.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Märkische Sagen und Märchen</span></span> (Berlin, 1843), p. 330. As to the divining-rod in general, see A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gütersloh, 1886), pp. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 813 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. Baring-Gould, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Curious Myths of the Middle Ages</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 55 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Kuhn plausibly suggests that the forked shape of the divining-rod is a rude representation of the human form. He compares the shape and magic properties of mandragora.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Munich, 1848-1855), i. 296 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Krause, <span class="tei tei-q">“Abergläubische Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin und nächster Umgebung,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xv. (1883) p. 89.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Sagen Tirols</span></span> (Zurich, 1857), p. 393.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Karl Freiherr von Leoprechting, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem Lechrain</span></span> (Munich, 1855), p. 98. Some people in Swabia say that the hazel branch which is to serve as a divining-rod should be cut at midnight on Good Friday, and that it should be laid on the altar and mass said over it. If that is done, we are told that a Protestant can use it to quite as good effect as a Catholic. See E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 244 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 268. Some of the Wends of the Spreewald agree that the divining-rod should be made of hazel-wood, and they say that it ought to be wrapt in swaddling-bands, laid on a white plate, and baptized on Easter Saturday. Many of them, however, think that it should be made of <span class="tei tei-q">“yellow willow.”</span> See Wilibald von Schulenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald</span></span> (Leipsic, 1880), pp. 204 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A remarkable property of the hazel in the opinion of Bavarian peasants is that it is never struck by lightning; this immunity it has enjoyed ever since the day when it protected the Mother of God against a thunderstorm on her flight into Egypt. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, i. (Munich, 1860) p. 371.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 289, referring to Dybeck's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Runa</span></span>, 1844, p. 22, and 1845, p. 80.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), pp. 266 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Heinrich Pröhle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Harzsagen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), i. 99, No. 23.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 812 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, iii. 289; A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gütersloh, 1886), pp. 188-193; Walter K. Kelly, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1863), pp. 174-178; J. F. L. Woeste, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark</span></span> (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 44; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</span></span> (Leipsic, 1848), p. 459, No. 444; Ernst Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 240 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 265; C. Russwurm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aberglaube in Russland,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (Göttingen, 1859) p. 153; J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 88, No. 623; Paul Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1906), ii. 207 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Swabia some people say that the bird which brings the springwort is not the woodpecker but the hoopoe (E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 240). Others associate the springwort with other birds. See H. Pröhle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Harzsagen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. 116, No. 308; A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 190. It is from its power of springing or bursting open all doors and locks that the springwort derives its name (German <i xml:lang="de">Springwurzel</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> x. 40.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ernst Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 238 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 264.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg045">45</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg046">46</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg049">49</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg054">54</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg055">55</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg059">59</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg060">60</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg062">62</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg064">64</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg065">65</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg066">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg067">67</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Baron de Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calendrier Belge</span></span> (Brussels, 1861-1862), i. 423 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anton Birlinger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Völksthumliches aus Schwaben</span></span>, Freiburg im Breisgau, (1861-1862), i. 278, § 437.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Robert Eisel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</span></span> (Gera, 1871), p. 210, Nr. 551.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. J. A. von Tettau und J. D. H. Temme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</span></span> (Berlin, 1837), pp. 263 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</span></span> (Münster i. W., 1890), p. 128.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny derives the name Druid from the Greek <i xml:lang="el">drus</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“oak.”</span> He did not know that the Celtic word for oak was the same (<i>daur</i>), and that therefore Druid, in the sense of priest of the oak, might be genuine Celtic, not borrowed from the Greek. This etymology is accepted by some modern scholars. See G. Curtius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundzüge der Griechischen Etymologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Leipsic, 1879), pp. 238 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. Vaniček, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechisch-Lateinisch Etymologisches Wörterbuch</span></span> (Leipsic, 1877), pp. 368 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; (Sir) John Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1888), pp. 221 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> However, this derivation is disputed by other scholars, who prefer to derive the name from a word meaning knowledge or wisdom, so that Druid would mean <span class="tei tei-q">“wizard”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“magician.”</span> See J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 305; Otto Schrader, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reallexikon der Indogermanischen Altertumskunde</span></span> (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 638 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. D'Arbois de Jubainville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Druides et les Dieux Celtiques à forme d'animaux</span></span> (Paris, 1906), pp. 1, 11, 83 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The last-mentioned scholar formerly held that the etymology of Druid was unknown. See his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cours de Littérature Celtique</span></span>, i. (Paris, 1883) pp. 117-127.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xvi. 249-251. In the first edition of this book I understood Pliny to say that the Druidical ceremony of cutting the mistletoe fell in the sixth month, that is, in June; and hence I argued that it probably formed part of the midsummer festival. But in accordance with Latin usage the words of Pliny (<i xml:lang="la">sexta luna</i>, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“sixth moon”</span>) can only mean <span class="tei tei-q">“the sixth day of the month.”</span> I have to thank my friend Mr. W. Warde Fowler for courteously pointing out my mistake to me. Compare my note in the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Athenaeum</span></span>, November 21st, 1891, p. 687. I also misunderstood Pliny's words, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">et saeculi post tricesimum annum, quia jam virium abunde habeat nec sit sui dimidia</i>,”</span> applying them to the tree instead of to the moon, to which they really refer. After <i xml:lang="la">saeculi</i> we must understand <i xml:lang="la">principium</i> from the preceding <i xml:lang="la">principia</i>. With the thirty years' cycle of the Druids we may compare the sixty years' cycle of the Boeotian festival of the Great Daedala (Pausanias, ix. 3. 5; see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 140 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), which, like the Druidical rite in question, was essentially a worship, or perhaps rather a conjuration, of the sacred oak. Whether any deeper affinity, based on common Aryan descent, may be traced between the Boeotian and the Druidical ceremony, I do not pretend to determine. In India a cycle of sixty years, based on the sidereal revolution of Jupiter, has long been in use. The sidereal revolution of Jupiter is accomplished in approximately twelve solar years (more exactly 11 years and 315 days), so that five of its revolutions make a period of approximately sixty years. It seems, further, that in India a much older cycle of sixty lunar years was recognized. See Christian Lassen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indische Alter-thumskunde</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 988 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Prof. F. Kielhorn (Göttingen), <span class="tei tei-q">“The Sixty-year Cycle of Jupiter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xviii. (1889) pp. 193-209; J. F. Fleet, <span class="tei tei-q">“A New System of the Sixty-year Cycle of Jupiter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> pp. 221-224. In Tibet the use of a sixty-years' cycle has been borrowed from India. See W. Woodville Rockhill, <span class="tei tei-q">“Tibet,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1891</span></span> (London, 1891), p. 207 note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxiv. 11 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxxiii. 94.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. John Batchelor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ainu and their Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1901), p. 222.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</span></span>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 198 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. le baron Roger (ancien Gouverneur de la Colonie française du Sénégal), <span class="tei tei-q">“Notice sur le Gouvernement, les Mœurs, et les Superstitions des Nègres du pays de Walo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span>, viii. (Paris, 1827) pp. 357 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg077">77</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<p>Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Times</span></span>, 2nd April, 1901, p. 9: <span class="tei tei-q">“The Tunis correspondent of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Temps</span></span> reports that in the course of certain operations in the Belvedere Park in Tunis the workmen discovered a huge circle of enormous stumps of trees ranged round an immense square stone showing signs of artistic chisel work. In the neighbourhood were found a sort of bronze trough containing a gold sickle in perfect preservation, and a sarcophagus containing a skeleton. About the forehead of the skeleton was a gold band, having in the centre the image of the sun, accompanied by hieratic signs, which are provisionally interpreted as the monogram of Teutates. The discovery of such remains in North Africa has created a sensation.”</span> As to the Celtic god Teutates and the human sacrifices offered to him, see Lucan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pharsalia</span></span>, i. 444 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>:</p>
						<p>
							<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Et quibus immitis placatur sanguine diro</span><br/>
							<span style="font-style: italic">Teutates horrensque feris altaribus Hesus.</span></span>”</span>
						</p>
						<p>Compare (Sir) John Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1888), pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 232. Branches of the sacred olive at Olympia, which were to form the victors' crowns, had to be cut with a golden sickle by a boy whose parents were both alive. See the Scholiast on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> iii. 60, p. 102, ed. Aug. Boeck (Leipsic, 1819). In Assyrian ritual it was laid down that, before felling a sacred tamarisk to make magical images out of the wood, the magician should pray to the sun-god Shamash and touch the tree with a golden axe. See C. Fossey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Magie Assyrienne</span></span> (Paris, 1902), pp. 132 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Some of the ancients thought that the root of the marsh-mallow, which was used in medicine, should be dug up with gold and then preserved from contact with the ground (Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xx. 29). At the great horse-sacrifice in ancient India it was prescribed by ritual that the horse should be slain by a golden knife, because <span class="tei tei-q">“gold is light”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“by means of the golden light the sacrificer also goes to the heavenly world.”</span> See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Satapatha-Brâhmana</span></span>, translated by Julius Eggeling, Part v. (Oxford, 1900) p. 303 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. xliv.). It has been a rule of superstition both in ancient and modern times that certain plants, to which medical or magical virtues were attributed, should not be cut with iron. See the fragment of Sophocles's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Root-cutters</span></span>, quoted by Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn</span></span>. v. 19. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> iv. 513 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metamorph.</span></span> vii. 227; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxiv. 68, 103, 176; and above, p. 65 (as to purple loosestrife in Russia). On the objection to the use of iron in such cases compare F. Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Des Gervasius von Tilbury Otia Imperialia</span></span> (Hanover, 1856), pp. 102 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Étienne Aymonier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes sur les Coutumes et Croyances Superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cochinchine Française, Excursions et Reconnaissance</span></span> No. 16 (Saigon, 1883), p. 136.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ernst Meier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Über Pflanzen und Kräuter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, i. (Göttingen, 1853), pp. 443 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The sun enters the sign of Sagittarius about November 22nd.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 533, referring to Dybeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Runa</span></span>, 1845, p. 80.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 87.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xvi. 250, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Omnia sanantem appellantes suo vocabulo</i>.”</span> See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg077">77</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 1009: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="de">Sonst aber wird das welsche</i> olhiach, <i xml:lang="de">bretagn.</i> ollyiach, <i xml:lang="de">ir.</i> uileiceach, <i xml:lang="de">gal.</i> uileice, <i xml:lang="de">d. i. allheiland</i>, <i xml:lang="de">von</i> ol, uile universalis, <i xml:lang="de">als benennung des mistels angegeben</i>.”</span> My lamented friend, the late R. A. Neil of Pembroke College, Cambridge, pointed out to me that in N. M'Alpine's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gaelic Dictionary</span></span> (Seventh Edition, Edinburgh and London, 1877, p. 432) the Gaelic word for mistletoe is given as <i xml:lang="gd">an t' uil</i>, which, Mr. Neil told me, means <span class="tei tei-q">“all-healer.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Mythologie des Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 73.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Hilderic Friend, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Flowers and Flower Lore</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1886), p. 378. Compare A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gütersloh, 1886), p. 206, referring to Keysler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiq. Sept.</span></span> p. 308.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 102 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The local name for mistletoe here is <i>besq</i>, which may be derived from the Latin <i xml:lang="la">viscum</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gütersloh, 1886), p. 205; Walter K. Kelly, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1863), p. 186.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Einige Notizen aus einem alten Kräuterbuche,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (Göttingen, 1859) pp. 41 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Francis Pérot, <span class="tei tei-q">“Prières, Invocations, Formules Sacrées, Incantations en Bourbonnais,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue des Traditions Populaires</span></span>, xviii. (1903) p. 299.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">County Folk-lore</span></span>, v. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lincolnshire</span></span>, collected by Mrs. Gutch and Mabel Peacock (London, 1908), p. 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prof. P. J. Veth, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Leer der Signatuur, iii. De Mistel en de Riembloem,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1894) p. 111. He names Ray in England (about 1700), Boerhaave in Holland (about 1720), and Van Swieten, a pupil of Boerhaave's (about 1745).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">County Folk-lore</span></span>, vol. v. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lincolnshire</span></span>, collected by Mrs. Gutch and Mabel Peacock (London, 1908), p. 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Mr. Shaw, Minister of Elgin, quoted by Thomas Pennant in his <span class="tei tei-q">“Tour in Scotland, 1769,”</span> printed in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, iii. (London, 1809) p. 136; J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), iii. 151.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Walter K. Kelly, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Curiosities of Indo-European Tradition and Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1863), p. 186.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On this point Prof. P. J. Veth (<span class="tei tei-q">“De Leer der Signatuur,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1894) p. 112) quotes Cauvet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Eléments d'Histoire naturelle medicale</span></span>, ii. 290: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="fr">La famille des Loranthacées ne nous offre aucun intéret.</i>”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gütersloh, 1886), p. 205, referring to Dybeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Runa</span></span>, 1845, p. 80.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 204, referring to Rochholz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schweizersagen aus d. Aargau</span></span>, ii. 202.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 153.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 37, § 218. In Upper Bavaria the mistletoe is burned for this purpose along with the so-called palm-branches which were consecrated on Palm Sunday. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, i. (Munich, 1860), p. 371.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 206, referring to Albertus Magnus, p. 155; Prof. P. J. Veth, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Leer der Signatuur,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1904) p. 111.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Sagen Tirols</span></span> (Zurich, 1857), p. 398.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 97, § 128; Prof. P. J. Veth, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Leer der Signatuur,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1894) p. 111.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 267, § 419.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Henderson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes on the Folk-lore of the Northern Counties of England and the Borders</span></span> (London, 1879), p. 114.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), p. 269.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg077">77</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg078">78</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg082">82</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg084">84</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg083">83</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg086">86</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 353, referring to Dybeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Runa</span></span>, 1844, p. 22.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg086">86</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Wahlenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Flora Suecica</span></span> (Upsala, 1824-1826), ii. No. 1143 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Viscum album</span></span>, pp. 649 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Hab. in sylvarum densiorum et humidiorum arboribus frondosis, ut Pyris, Quercu, Fago etc. per Sueciam temperatiorem passim</i>.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 171 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), p. 259.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 78, who adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="de">Mahnen die Johannisfeuer an Baldrs Leichenbrand?</i>”</span> This pregnant hint perhaps contains in germ the solution of the whole myth.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 148.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 186.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg026">26</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the worship of the oak in Europe, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare P. Wagler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</span></span>, in two parts (Wurzen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>, and Berlin, 1891).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, xii. 5.1, p. 567. The name is a compound of <i>dryu</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“oak,”</span> and <i>nemed</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“temple”</span> (H. F. Tozer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Selections from Strabo</span></span>, Oxford, 1893, p. 284). We know from Jerome (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentar. in Epist. ad Galat.</span></span> book ii. praef.) that the Galatians retained their native Celtic speech as late as the fourth century of our era.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 365.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 55 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 58 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ii. 542, iii. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. Wagler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</span></span> (Berlin, 1891), pp. 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 363 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 371.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Mythologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 108.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, i. 10. Compare C. Bötticher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</span></span> (Berlin, 1856), pp. 133 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Bötticher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 111 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ed. C. Robert, i. (Berlin, 1894) pp. 122 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; P. Wagler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</span></span> (Berlin, 1891), pp. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> It is noteworthy that at Olympia the only wood that might be used in sacrificing to Zeus was the white poplar (Pausanias, v. 14. 2). But it is probable that herein Zeus, who was an intruder at Olympia, merely accepted an old local custom which, long before his arrival, had been observed in the worship of Pelops (Pausanias, v. 13. 3).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Without hazarding an opinion on the vexed question of the cradle of the Aryans, I may observe that in various parts of Europe the oak seems to have been formerly more common than it is now. See the evidence collected in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>However, some exceptions to the rule are recorded. See above, vol. i. pp. 169, 278 (oak and fir), 220 (plane and birch), 281, 283, 286 (limewood), 282 (poplar and fir), 286 (cornel-tree), 291 (birch or other hard wood), 278, 280 (nine kinds of wood). According to Montanus, the need-fire, Easter, and Midsummer fires were kindled by the friction of oak and limewood. See Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span> (Iserlohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 159. But elsewhere (pp. 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 127) the same writer says that the need-fire and Midsummer fires were produced by the friction of oak and fir-wood.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. p. 177.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Prätorius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deliciae Prussicae</span></span>, herausgegeben von Dr. William Pierson (Berlin, 1871), pp. 19 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> W. R. S. Ralston says (on what authority I do not know) that if the fire maintained in honour of the Lithuanian god Perkunas went out, it was rekindled by sparks struck from a stone which the image of the god held in his hand (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span>, London, 1872, p. 88).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 148, 271, 272, 274, 275, 276, 281, 289, 294.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 148, 155.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 186.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 366. However, sacred fires of other wood than oak are not unknown among Aryan peoples. Thus at Olympia white poplar was the wood burnt in sacrifices to Zeus (above, p. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">n.</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span>); at Delphi the perpetual fire was fed with pinewood (Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De EI apud Delphos</span></span>, 2), and it was over the glowing embers of pinewood that the Soranian Wolves walked at Soracte (above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg014">14</a>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Diedeutschen Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</span></span> (Iserlohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 127, 159. The log is called in German <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sckarholz</span></span>. The custom appears to have prevailed particularly in Westphalia, about Sieg and Lahn. Compare Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 12, as to the similar custom at Christmas. The use of the <i xml:lang="de">Scharholz</i> is reported to be found also in Niederlausitz and among the neighbouring Saxons. See Paul Wagler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</span></span> (Berlin, 1891), pp. 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 248, 250, 251, 257, 258, 260, 263. Elsewhere the Yule log has been made of fir, beech, holly, yew, crab-tree, or olive. See above, vol. i. pp. 249, 257, 263.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 140 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A curious use of an oak-wood fire to detect a criminal is reported from Germany. If a man has been found murdered and his murderer is unknown, you are recommended to proceed as follows. You kindle a fire of dry oak-wood, you pour some of the blood from the wounds on the fire, and you change the poor man's shoes, putting the right shoe on the left foot, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">vice versa</span></span>. As soon as that is done, the murderer is struck blind and mad, so that he fancies he is riding up to the throat in water; labouring under this delusion he returns to the corpse, when you can apprehend him and deliver him up to the arm of justice with the greatest ease. See Montanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 159 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xiii. 119: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Alexander Cornelius arborem leonem appellavit ex qua facta esset Argo, similem robori viscum ferenti, quae neque aqua neque igni possit corrumpi, sicuti nec viscum, nulli alii cognitam, quod equidem sciam.</i>”</span> Here the tree out of which the ship Argo was made is said to have been destructible neither by fire nor water; and as the tree is compared to a mistletoe-bearing oak, and the mistletoe itself is said to be indestructible by fire and water, it seems to follow that the same indestructibility may have been believed to attach to the oak which bore the mistletoe, so long at least as the mistletoe remained rooted on the boughs.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 26 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A number of the following examples were collected by Mr. E. Clodd in his paper, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Philosophy of Punchkin,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Journal</span></span>, ii. (1884) pp. 288-303; and again in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myths and Dreams</span></span> (London, 1885), pp. 188-198. The subject of the external soul, both in folk-tales and in custom, has been well handled by G. A. Wilken in his two papers, <span class="tei tei-q">“De betrekking tusschen menschen- dieren- en plantenleven naar het volksgeloof,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Indische Gids</span></span>, November 1884, pp. 595-612, and <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Gids</span></span>, 1888, No. 5. In <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage”</span> Wilken has reproduced, to a great extent in the same words, most of the evidence cited by him in <span class="tei tei-q">“De betrekking,”</span> yet without referring to that paper. When I wrote this book in 1889-1890 I was unacquainted with <span class="tei tei-q">“De betrekking,”</span> but used with advantage <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> a copy of it having been kindly sent me by the author. I am the more anxious to express my obligations to <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> because I have had little occasion to refer to it, most of the original authorities cited by the author being either in my own library or easily accessible to me in Cambridge. It would be a convenience to anthropologists if Wilken's valuable papers, dispersed as they are in various Dutch periodicals which are seldom to be met with in England, were collected and published together. After the appearance of my first anthropological essay in 1885, Professor Wilken entered into correspondence with me, and thenceforward sent me copies of his papers as they appeared; but of his papers published before that date I have not a complete set. (Note to the Second Edition.) The wish expressed in the foregoing note has now been happily fulfilled. Wilken's many scattered papers have been collected and published in a form which leaves nothing to be desired (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De verspreide Geschriften van Prof. Dr. G. A. Wilken</span></span>, verzameld door Mr. F. D. E. van Ossenbruggen, in four volumes, The Hague, 1912). The two papers <span class="tei tei-q">“De betrekking”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage”</span> are reprinted in the third volume, pp. 289-309 and pp. 551-579. The subject of the external soul in relation to Balder has been fully illustrated and discussed by Professor F. Kauffmann in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder, Mythus und Sage</span></span> (Strasburg, 1902), pp. 136 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Amongst the first to collect examples of the external soul in folk-tales was the learned Dr. Reinhold Köhler (in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orient und Occident</span></span>, ii., Göttingen, 1864, pp. 100-103; reprinted with additional references in the writer's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kleinere Schriften</span></span>, i., Weimar, 1898, pp. 158-161). Many versions of the tale were also cited by W. R. S. Ralston (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Russian Folk-tales</span></span>, London, 1873, pp. 109 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). (Note to the Third Edition.)<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mary Frere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Old Deccan Days</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1881), pp. 12-16.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maive Stokes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Fairy Tales</span></span> (London, 1880), pp. 58-60. For similar Hindoo stories, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Lai Behari Day, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Bengal</span></span> (London, 1883), pp. 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wide-awake Stories</span></span> (Bombay and London, 1884), pp. 58-60.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mary Frere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Old Deccan Days</span></span>, pp. 239 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lal Behari Day, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Bengal</span></span>, pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> For similar stories of necklaces, see Mary Frere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Old Deccan Days</span></span>, pp. 233 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wide-awake Stories</span></span>, pp. 83 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Knowles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Kashmir</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1893), pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Knowles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 134.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Knowles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 382 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lal Behari Day, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Bengal</span></span>, pp. 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 253 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, i. (1872) p. 117. For an Indian story in which a giant's life is in five black bees, see W. A. Clouston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Tales and Fictions</span></span> (Edinburgh and London, 1887), i. 350.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, i. (1872), p. 171.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Voelker des oestlichen Asien</span></span>, iv. (Jena, 1868) pp. 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lal Behari Day, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Bengal</span></span>, p. 189.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. A. Steel and R. C. Temple, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wide-awake Stories</span></span> (Bombay and London, 1884), pp. 52, 64. In the Indian <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jataka</span></span> there is a tale (book ii. No. 208) which relates how Buddha in the form of a monkey deceived a crocodile by pretending that monkeys kept their hearts in figs growing on a tree. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Jataka or Stories of the Buddha's former Births</span></span> translated from the Pali by various hands, vol. ii. translated by W. H. D. Rouse (Cambridge, 1895), pp. 111 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. W. Leitner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Languages and Races of Dardistan</span></span>, Third Edition (Lahore, 1878), p. 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 8; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 34; Pausanias, x. 31. 4; Aeschylus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Choeph.</span></span> 604 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> ii.; Dio Chrysostom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> lxvii. vol. ii. p. 231, ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic, 1857); Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 171, 174; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> viii. 445 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In his play on this theme Euripides made the life of Meleager to depend on an olive-leaf which his mother had given birth to along with the babe. See J. Malalas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chronographia</span></span>, vi. pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> ed. L. Dindorf (Bonn, 1831); J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scholia on Lycophron</span></span>, 492 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (vol. ii. pp. 646 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ed. Chr. G. Müller, Leipsic, 1811); G. Knaack, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zur Meleagersage,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rheinisches Museum</span></span>, N. F. xlix. (1894) pp. 310-313.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 15. 8; Aeschylus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Choeph.</span></span> 612 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Pausanias, i. 19. 4; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ciris</span></span>, 116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> viii. 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> According to J. Tzetzes (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 650) not the life but the strength of Nisus was in his golden hair; when it was pulled out, he became weak and was slain by Minos. According to Hyginus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 198) Nisus was destined to reign only so long as he kept the purple lock on his head.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, ii. 4. 5 and 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. von Hahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische und albanesische Märchen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1864), i. 217; a similar story, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> ii. 282.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder</span></span> (Leipsic, 1877), pp. 91 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The same writer found in the island of Zacynthus a belief that the whole strength of the ancient Greeks resided in three hairs on their breasts, and that it vanished whenever these hairs were cut; but if the hairs were allowed to grow again, their strength returned (B. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Volksleben der Neugriechen</span></span>, Leipsic, 1871, p. 206). The Biblical story of Samson and Delilah (Judges xvi.) implies a belief of the same sort, as G. A. Wilken abundantly shewed in his paper, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Gids</span></span>, 1888, No. 5 (reprinted in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span>, The Hague, 1912, vol. iii. pp. 551-579).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. von Hahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 215 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> ii. 275 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Similar stories, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> ii. 204, 294 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In an Albanian story a monster's strength is in three pigeons, which are in a hare, which is in the silver tusk of a wild boar. When the boar is killed, the monster feels ill; when the hare is cut open, he can hardly stand on his feet; when the three pigeons are killed, he expires. See Aug. Dozon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes albanais</span></span> (Paris, 1881), pp. 132 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. von Hahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 260 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> i. 187.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> ii. 23 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Émile Legrand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires grecs</span></span> (Paris, 1881), pp. 191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Parallela</span></span>, 26. In both the Greek and Italian stories the subject of quarrel between nephew and uncles is the skin of a boar, which the nephew presented to his lady-love and which his uncles took from her.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Basile, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pentamerone</span></span>, übertragen von Felix Liebrecht (Breslau, 1846), ii. 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. H. Busk, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore of Rome</span></span> (London, 1874), pp. 164 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. F. Crane, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Italian Popular Tales</span></span> (London, 1885), pp. 31-34. The hero had acquired the power of turning himself into an eagle, a lion, and an ant from three creatures of these sorts whose quarrel about their shares in a dead ass he had composed. This incident occurs in other tales of the same type. See below, note 2 and pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg120">120</a> with note 2, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg132">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg133">133</a> with note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Andrews, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes Ligures</span></span> (Paris, 1892), No. 46, pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In a parallel Sicilian story the hero Beppino slays a sorcerer in the same manner after he had received from an eagle, a lion, and an ant the same gift of transformation in return for the same service. See G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fiabe, Novelle e Racconti popolari Siciliani</span></span>, ii. (Palermo, 1875) p. 215; and for another Sicilian parallel, Laura Gonzenbach, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sicilianische Märchen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1870), No. 6, pp. 34-38.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anton Dietrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Russian Popular Tales</span></span> (London, 1857), pp. 21-24.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jeremiah Curtin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myths and Folk-tales of the Russians, Western Slavs, and Magyars</span></span> (London, 1891), pp. 119-122. Compare W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Russian Folk-tales</span></span> (London, 1873), pp. 100-105.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 109.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Russian Folk-tales</span></span>, pp. 113 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Id.</span></span>, p. 114.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Id.</span></span>, p. 110.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Madam Csedomille Mijatovies, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Serbian Folk-lore</span></span>, edited by the Rev. W. Denton (London, 1874), pp. 167-172; F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen und Märchen der Südslaven</span></span> (Leipsic, 1883-1884), i. 164-169.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. H. Wratislaw, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sixty Folk-tales from exclusively Slavonic Sources</span></span> (London, 1889), pp. 224-231.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Leskien und K. Brugmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen</span></span> (Strasburg, 1882), pp. 423-430; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 569-571.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Josef Haltrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), No. 34 (No. 33 of the first edition), pp. 149 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. W. Wolf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Märchen und Sagen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1845), No. 20, pp. 87-93.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Strackerjan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</span></span> (Oldenburg, 1867), ii. 306-308, § 622. In this story the flowers are rather life-tokens than external souls. The life-token has been carefully studied by Mr. E. S. Hartland in the second volume of his learned work <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Legend of Perseus</span></span> (London, 1895).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Müllenhoff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Lieder der Herzogthümer Schleswig Holstein und Lauenburg</span></span> (Kiel, 1845), pp. 404 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Chr. Asbjörnsen og J. Moe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Norske Folke-Eventyr</span></span> (Christiania, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), No. 36, pp. 174-180; G. W. Dasent, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Tales from the Norse</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1859), pp. 55 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Chr. Asbjörnsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Norske Folke-Eventyr</span></span>, Ny Samling (Christiania, 1871), No. 70, pp. 35-40; G. W. Dasent, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tales from the Fjeld</span></span> (London, 1874), pp. 223-230 (<span class="tei tei-q">“Boots and the Beasts”</span>). As in other tales of this type, it is said that the hero found three animals (a lion, a falcon, and an ant) quarrelling over a dead horse, and received from them the power of transforming himself into animals of these species as a reward for dividing the carcase fairly among them.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Svend Grundtvig, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dänische Volksmärchen</span></span>, übersetzt von A. Strodtmann, Zweite Sammlung (Leipsic, 1879), pp. 194-218.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Svend Grundtvig, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dänische Volksmärchen</span></span>, übersetzt von Willibald Leo (Leipsic, 1878), pp. 29-45.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. C. Poestion, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isländische Märchen</span></span> (Vienna, 1884), No. vii. pp. 49-55. The same story is told with minor variations by Konrad Maurer in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isländische Volkssagen der Gegenwart</span></span> (Leipsic, 1860), pp. 277-280. In his version a giant and giantess, brother and sister, have their life in one stone, which they throw backwards and forwards to each other; when the stone is caught and broken by the heroine, the giant and giantess at once expire. The tale was told to Maurer when he was crossing an arm of the sea in a small boat; and the waves ran so high and broke into the boat so that he could not write the story down at the time but had to trust to his memory in recording it afterwards.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germanische Mythen</span></span> (Berlin, 1858), p. 592; John Jamieson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language</span></span>, New Edition, revised by J. Longmuir and D. Donaldson (Paisley, 1879-1882), iv. 869, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Yule.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. F. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Tales of the West Highlands</span></span>, New Edition (Paisley and London, 1890), i. 7-11.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. F. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Tales of the West Highlands</span></span>, New Edition, i. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of Soul</span></span>, p. 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. D. MacInnes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk and Hero Tales</span></span> (London, 1890), pp. 103-121.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. Macdougall, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk and Hero Tales</span></span> (London, 1891), pp. 76 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Waifs and Strays of Celtic Tradition</span></span>, No. iii.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. James Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion and Myth</span></span> (London, 1893), pp. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer tells us that in his youth a certain old Betty Miles used to terrify him with this tale. For the tradition of Headless Hugh, who seems to have been the only son of Hector, first chief of Lochbuy, in the fourteenth century, see J. G. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</span></span> (Glasgow, 1902), pp. III <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> India also has its stories of headless horsemen. See W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (London, 1896), i. 256 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. James Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion and Myth</span></span>, pp. 191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, from information furnished by the Rev. A. Mackay. In North Uist there is a sept known as <span class="tei tei-q">“the MacCodrums of the seals.”</span> and a precisely similar legend is told to explain their descent from seals. See J. G. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</span></span> (Glasgow, 1900), p. 284.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jeremiah Curtin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myths and Folk-tales of Ireland</span></span> (London, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1885), pp. 63 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. M. Luzel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de Basse-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1887), i. 435-449. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Veillées Bretonnes</span></span> (Morlaix, 1879), pp. 133 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For two other French stories of the same type, taken down in Lorraine, see E. Cosquin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de Lorraine</span></span> (Paris, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), Nos. 15 and 50 (vol. i. pp. 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, vol. ii. pp. 128 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). In both of them there figures a miraculous beast which can only be slain by breaking a certain egg against its head; but we are not told that the life of the beast was in the egg. In both of them also the hero receives from three animals, whose dispute about the carcase of a dead beast he has settled, the power of changing himself into animals of the same sort. See the remarks and comparisons of the learned editor, Monsieur E. Cosquin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 170 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. M. Luzel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Veillées Bretonnes</span></span> pp. 127 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(Sir) Gaston Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de l'Égypte ancienne</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Paris, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. M. Flinders Petrie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Egyptian Tales</span></span>, Second Series (London, 1895), pp. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Alfred Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altägyptische Sagen und Märchen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 58-77. Compare W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das älteste Märchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859) pp. 232-259. The manuscript of the story, which is now in the British Museum, belonged to an Egyptian prince, who was afterwards King Seti II. and reigned about the year 1300 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> It is beautifully written and in almost perfect condition.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Thousand and One Nights, commonly called, in England, The Arabian Nights' Entertainments</span></span>, translated by E. W. Lane (London, 1839-1841), iii. 339-345.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Spitta-Bey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes arabes modernes</span></span> (Leyden and Paris, 1883), No. 2, pp. 12 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The story in its main outlines is identical with the Cashmeer story of <span class="tei tei-q">“The Ogress Queen”</span> (J. H. Knowles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Kashmir</span></span>, pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) and the Bengalee story of <span class="tei tei-q">“The Boy whom Seven Mothers Suckled”</span> (Lal Behari Day, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-tales of Bengal</span></span>, pp. 117 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, i. 170 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). In another Arabian story the life of a witch is bound up with a phial; when it is broken, she dies (W. A. Clouston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Group of Eastern Romances and Stories</span></span>, Privately printed, 1889, p. 30). A similar incident occurs in a Cashmeer story (J. H. Knowles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 73). In the Arabian story mentioned in the text, the hero, by a genuine touch of local colour, is made to drink the milk of an ogress's breasts and hence is regarded by her as her son. The same incident occurs in Kabyle and Berber tales. See J. Rivière, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de la Kabylie du Djurdjura</span></span> (Paris, 1882), p. 239; R. Basset, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nouveaux Contes Berbères</span></span> (Paris, 1897), p. 128, with the editor's note, pp. 339 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In a Mongolian story a king refuses to kill a lad because he has unwittingly partaken of a cake kneaded with the milk of the lad's mother (B. Jülg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mongolische Märchen-Sammlung, die neun Märchen des Siddhi-Kür</span></span>, Innsbruck, 1868, p. 183). Compare W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia</span></span>, New Edition (London, 1903), p. 176; and for the same mode of creating kinship among other races, see A. d'Abbadie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Douze ans dans la Haute Ethiopie</span></span> (Paris, 1868), pp. 272 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Tausch, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notices of the Circassians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, i. (1834) p. 104; J. Biddulph, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</span></span> (London, 1880), pp. 77, 83 (compare G. W. Leitner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Languages and Races of Dardistan</span></span>, Lahore, 1878, p. 34); Denzil C. J. Ibbetson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Settlement Report of the Panipat, Tahsil, and Karnal Parganah of the Karnal District</span></span> (Allahabad, 1883), p. 101; J. Moura, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Royaume du Cambodge</span></span> (Paris, 1883), i. 427; F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), p. 14; J. H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among Congo Cannibals</span></span> (London, 1913), p. 132. When the Masai of East Africa make peace with an enemy, each tribe brings a cow with a calf and a woman with a baby. The two cows are exchanged, and the enemy's child is suckled at the breast of the Masai woman, and the Masai baby is suckled at the breast of the woman belonging to the enemy. See A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Masai</span></span> (Oxford, 1905), pp. 321 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Webster, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Basque Legends</span></span> (London, 1877), pp. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Vinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le folk-lore du pays Basque</span></span> (Paris, 1883), pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As so often in tales of this type, the hero is said to have received his wonderful powers of metamorphosis from animals whom he found quarrelling about their shares in a dead beast.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Rivière, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de la Kabylie du Djurdjura</span></span> (Paris, 1882), p. 191.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. Jones and L. L. Kropf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Folk-tales of the Magyar</span></span> (London, 1889), pp. 205 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. H. Busk, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Folk-lore of Rome</span></span> (London, 1874), p. 168.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lappländische Märchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, N.R., iii. (1870) pp. 174 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. C. Poestion, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lappländische Märchen</span></span> (Vienna, 1886), No. 20, pp. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Castren, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnologische Vorlesungen über die altaischen Völker</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1857), pp. 173 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Jülg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kalmückische Märchen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1866), No. 12, pp. 58 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Anton Schiefner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Heldensagen der Minussinschen Tataren</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1859), pp. 172-176.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Schiefner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 108-112.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Schiefner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 360-364; A. Castren, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vorlesungen über die finnische Mythologie</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1857), pp. 186 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Schiefner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 189-193. In another Tartar poem (Schiefner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 390 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) a boy's soul is shut up by his enemies in a box. While the soul is in the box, the boy is dead; when it is taken out, he is restored to life. In the same poem (p. 384) the soul of a horse is kept shut up in a box, because it is feared the owner of the horse will become the greatest hero on earth. But these cases are, to some extent, the converse of those in the text.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Schott, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ueber die Sage von Geser-Chan,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der königlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin</span></span>, 1851, p. 269.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Radloff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proben der Volkslitteratur der türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</span></span>, ii. (St. Petersburg, 1868), pp. 237 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Radloff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 531 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Radloff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. (St. Petersburg, 1872) pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Radloff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. (St. Petersburg, 1866) pp. 345 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, iv. (Leyden, 1901) pp. 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Khasis</span></span> (London, 1907), pp. 181-184.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“De betrekking tusschen menschen- dieren- en plantenleven naar het volksgeloof,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Indische Gids</span></span>, November 1884, pp. 600-602; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Gids</span></span>, 1888, No. 5, pp. 6 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (of the separate reprint); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), iii. 296-298, 559-561. Compare L. de Backer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Archipel Indien</span></span> (Paris, 1874), pp. 144-149. The Malay text of the long poem was published with a Dutch translation and notes by W. R. van Hoëvell (<span class="tei tei-q">“Sjaïr Bidasari, een oorspronkelijk Maleisch Gedicht, uitgegeven en van eene Vertaling en Aanteekeningen voorzien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</span></span>, xix. (Batavia, 1843) pp. 1-421).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von Rosenberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</span></span>, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) p. 111; H. Sundermann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Insel Nias,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</span></span>, xi. (1884) p. 453; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst</span></span> (Barmen, 1905), p. 71. Compare E. Modigliani, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Viaggio a Nías</span></span> (Milan, 1890), p. 339.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major A. J. N. Tremearne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hausa Superstitions and Customs</span></span> (London, 1913), pp. 131 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The original Hausa text of the story appears to be printed in Major Edgar's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Litafi na Tatsuniyoyi na Hausa</span></span> (ii. 27), to which Major Tremearne refers (p. 9).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major A. G. Leonard, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Lower Niger and its Tribes</span></span> (London, 1906), pp. 319-321.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Henri A. Junod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Chants et les Contes des Ba-ronga</span></span> (Lausanne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 253-256; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Life of a South African Tribe</span></span> (Neuchatel, 1912-1913), i. 338 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Curtin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myths and Folk-tales of the Russians, Western Slavs, and Magyars</span></span> (London, 1891), p. 551. The writer does not mention his authorities.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. B. Grinnell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pawnee Hero Stories and Folk-tales</span></span> (New York, 1889), pp. 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bear Man.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washington Matthews, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Mountain Chant: a Navajo Ceremony,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1887), pp. 406 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Franz Boas, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the United States National Museum for 1895</span></span> (Washington, 1897), p. 373.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 63 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. F. Matthes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</span></span> (The Hague, 1875), p. 54.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xxxix. (1895) pp. 23 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Van Paloppo naar Posso,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xlii. (1898) p. 72. As to the <i>lamoa</i> in general, see A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> xl. (1896) pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het koppensnellen der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes, en zijne beteekenis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie der Wetenschappen</span></span>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, iv. Reeks, iii. (Amsterdam, 1899) pp. 201 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het ijzer in Midden-Celebes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch- Indië</span></span>, liii. (1901) pp. 156 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Both the interpretations in the text appear to be inferences drawn by Mr. Kruijt from the statement of the natives, that, if they did not hang up these wooden models in the smithy, <span class="tei tei-q">“the iron would flow away and be unworkable”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="nl">zou het ijzer vervloeien en onbewerkbaar worden</i>”</span>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. H. B. Agerbeek, <span class="tei tei-q">“Enkele gebruiken van de Dajaksche bevolking der Pinoehlanden,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, li. (1909) pp. 447 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. Jacobsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen in die Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres</span></span> (Berlin, 1896), p. 199.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In a long list of female ornaments the prophet Isaiah mentions (iii. 20) <span class="tei tei-q">“houses of the soul”</span> (בת הנפש) or (שפנה תב), which modern scholars suppose to have been perfume boxes, as the Revised English Version translates the phrase. The name, literally translated <span class="tei tei-q">“houses of the soul,”</span> suggests that these trinkets were amulets of the kind mentioned in the text. See my article, <span class="tei tei-q">“Folk-lore in the Old Testament,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropological Essays presented to E. B. Tylor</span></span> (Oxford, 1907), pp. 148 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In ancient Egyptian tombs there are often found plaques or palettes of schist bearing traces of paint; some of them are decorated with engravings of animals or historical scenes, others are modelled in the shape of animals of various sorts, such as antelopes, hippopotamuses, birds, tortoises, and fish. As a rule only one such plaque is found in a tomb, and it lies near the hands of the mummy. It has been conjectured by M. Jean Capart that these plaques are amulets or soul-boxes, in which the external souls of the dead were supposed to be preserved. See Jean Capart, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Palettes en schiste de L'Égypte primitive</span></span> (Brussels, 1908), pp. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 19 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue des Questions Scientifiques</span></span>, avril, 1908). For a full description of these plaques or palettes, see Jean Capart, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Débuts de l'Art en Égypte</span></span> (Brussels, 1904), pp. 76 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 221 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Alice Werner, in a letter to the author, dated 25th September 1899. Miss Werner knew the old woman. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contemporary Review</span></span>, lxx. (July-December 1896), p. 389, where Miss Werner describes the ornament as a rounded peg, tapering to a point, with a neck or notch at the top.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. James Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion and Myth</span></span> (London, 1893), p. 190. Compare Dudley Kidd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Essential Kafir</span></span> (London, 1904), p. 83: <span class="tei tei-q">“The natives occasionally fix ox-horns in their roofs and say that the spirit of the chief lives in these horns and protects the hut; these horns also protect the hut from lightning, though not in virtue of their spiritual connections. (They are also used simply as ornaments.)”</span> No doubt amulets often degenerate into ornaments.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Thurnwald, <span class="tei tei-q">“Im Bismarckarchipel und auf den Salomo-inseln,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xlii. (1910) p. 136. As to the Ingniet, Ingiet, or Iniet Society see P. A. Kleintitschen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</span></span> (Hiltrup bei Münster, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 354 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; R. Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 598 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Cedrenus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historiarum Compendium</span></span>, p. 625B, vol. ii. p. 308, ed. Im. Bekker (Bonn, 1838-1839).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexandre Moret, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Du caractère religieux de la Royauté Pharaonique</span></span> (Paris, 1902), pp. 224 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the Egyptian doctrine of the spiritual double or soul (<i>ka</i>), see A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul</span></span> (London, 1895), pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die ägyptische Religion</span></span> (Berlin, 1905), p. 88; A. Moret, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mystères Égyptiens</span></span> (Paris, 1913), pp. 199 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Mason, <span class="tei tei-q">“Physical Character of the Karens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span>, 1866, Part ii. No. 1, p. 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures of John Tanner, during Thirty Years' Residence among the Indians</span></span>, prepared for the press by Edwin James, M.D. (London, 1830), pp. 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The passage has been already quoted by Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury) in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origin of Civilisation</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (London, 1882), p. 241.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>François Valentijn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Oud en Nieuw Oost-Indiën</span></span> (Dordrecht and Amsterdam, 1724-1726), ii. 143 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Gids</span></span>, 1888, No. 5, pp. 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (of the separate reprint); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), iii. 569 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. F. Riedel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</span></span> (The Hague, 1886), p. 137.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Dalyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The darker Superstitions of Scotland</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1834), pp. 637-639; C. de Mensignac, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recherches ethnographiques sur la Salive et le Crachat</span></span> (Bordeaux, 1892), p. 49 note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), ii. 281.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 281 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. de Sahagun, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</span></span>, traduite par D. Journdanet et R. Siméon (Paris, 1880), p. 274.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg102">102</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg110">110</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg117">117</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg135">135</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg136">136</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Walter E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin, No. 5, Superstition, Magic, and Medicine</span></span> (Brisbane, 1903), p. 27.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 202.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Duloup, <span class="tei tei-q">“Huit jours chez les M'Bengas,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue d'Ethnographie</span></span>, ii. (1883), p. 223; compare P. Barret, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Afrique Occidentale</span></span> (Paris, 1888), ii. 173.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fr. Kunstmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Valentin Ferdinand's Beschreibung der Serra Leoa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der histor. Classe der könig. Bayer. Akad. der Wissenschaften</span></span>, ix. (1866) pp. 131 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bruno Gutmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Feldbausitten und Wachstumsbräuche der Wadschagga,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xlv. (1913), p. 496.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Velten, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten und Gebräuche der Suaheli</span></span> (Göttingen, 1903), pp. 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Java it is customary to plant a tree, for example, a coco-nut palm, at the birth of a child, and when he grows up he reckons his age by the age of the tree. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, iii. (Lyons and Paris, 1830) pp. 400 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</span></span> (Jena, 1874-1875), i. 165.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion and Myth</span></span> (London, 1893), p. 178.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Trilles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Totémisme chez les Fân</span></span> (Münster i. W., 1912), p. 570.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. John H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among Congo Cannibals</span></span> (London, 1913), p. 295.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), pp. 52, 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 295 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; and for other examples of burying the afterbirth or navel-string at the foot of a tree or planting a young tree over these remains, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 182 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In Kiziba, a district to the west of Lake Victoria Nyanza, the afterbirth is similarly regarded as a sort of human being. Hence when twins are born the people speak of four children instead of two, reckoning the two afterbirths as two children. See H. Rehse, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kiziba, Land und Leute</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1910), p. 117. The conception of the afterbirth and navel-string as spiritual doubles of the child with whom they are born is held very firmly by the Kooboos, a primitive tribe of Sumatra. We are told that among these people <span class="tei tei-q">“a great vital power is ascribed to the navel-string and afterbirth; because they are looked upon as brother or sister of the infant, and though their bodies have not come to perfection, yet their soul and spirit are just as normal as those of the child and indeed have even reached a much higher stage of development. The navel-string (<i>oeri</i>) and afterbirth (<i>tĕm-boeni</i>) visit the man who was born with them thrice a day and thrice by night till his death, or they hover near him (<span class="tei tei-q">‘<i xml:lang="nl">zweven voorbij hem heen</i>’</span>). They are the good spirits, a sort of guardian angels of the man who came into the world with them and who lives on earth; they are said to guard him from all evil. Hence it is that the Kooboo always thinks of his navel-string and afterbirth (<i>oeri-tĕmboeni</i>) before he goes to sleep or to work, or undertakes a journey, and so on. Merely to think of them is enough; there is no need to invoke them, or to ask them anything, or to entreat them. By not thinking of them a man deprives himself of their good care.”</span> Immediately after the birth the navel-string and afterbirth are buried in the ground close by the spot where the birth took place; and a ceremony is performed over it, for were the ceremony omitted, the navel-string and afterbirth, <span class="tei tei-q">“instead of being a good spirit for the newly born child, might become an evil spirit for him and visit him with all sorts of calamities out of spite for this neglect.”</span> The nature of the ceremony performed over the spot is not described by our authority. The navel-string and afterbirth are often regarded by the Kooboos as one; their names are always mentioned together. See G. J. van Dongen, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Koeboe in de Onderafdeeling Koeboe-streken der Residentie Palembang,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, lxiii. (1910) pp. 229 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Franz Stuhlmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), p. 653.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ein Besuch in San Salvador</span></span> (Bremen, 1859), pp. 103 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Mensch in der Geschichte</span></span> (Leipsic, 1860), iii. 193.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Taylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1870), p. 184; Dumont D'Urville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse sur la corvette Astrolabe</span></span>, ii. 444.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. T. L. Travers, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes of the traditions and manners and customs of the Mori-oris,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute</span></span>, ix. (1876) p. 22.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The late Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter to me dated May 29th, 1901. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 184.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>N. Annandale, <span class="tei tei-q">“Customs of the Malayo-Siamese,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasciculi Malayenses</span></span>, Anthropology, part ii. (a) (May, 1904), p. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. F. Matthes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</span></span> (The Hague, 1875), p. 59.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. van Eck, <span class="tei tei-q">“Schetsen van het eiland Bali,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</span></span>, N.S., ix. (1880) pp. 417 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Simsonsage,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Gids</span></span>, 1888, No. 5, p. 26 (of the separate reprint); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), iii. 562.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. C. Schadee, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het familieleven en familierecht der Dajaks van Landak en Tajan,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, lxiii. (1910) p. 416.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Grabowsky, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Theogenie der Dajaken auf Borneo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, v. (1892) p. 133.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Perham, <span class="tei tei-q">“Manangism in Borneo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, No. 19 (Singapore, 1887), p. 97; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in H. Ling Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</span></span> (London, 1896), i. 278.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Angelo de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie des Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), i. pp. xxviii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 50; H. Ploss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Kind</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1884), i. 79.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii. p. 43, § 63.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-q">“Haarschurgodschaft bei den Südslaven,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1894) p. 193.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Karl Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span> (Leipsic, 1862-1863), ii. 129, No. 207.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Heilige Haine und Bäume der Finnen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lix. (1891) p. 350. Compare K. Rhamm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der heidenische Gottesdienst des finnischen Stammes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxvii. (1891) p. 344.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thomas Moore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life of Lord Byron</span></span>, i. 101 (i. 148, in the collected edition of Byron's works, London, 1832-1833).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Lockhart, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life of Sir Walter Scott</span></span> (First Edition), vi. 283 (viii. 317, Second Edition, Edinburgh, 1839).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Walter Scott's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal</span></span> (First Edition, Edinburgh, 1890), ii. 282, with the editor's note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of Miss A. H. Singleton to me, dated Rathmagle House, Abbey Leix, Ireland, 24th February, 1904.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Wagler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</span></span>, ii. (Berlin, 1891) pp. 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Woche</span></span>, Berlin, 31 August, 1901, p. 3, with an illustration shewing the garden and the tree.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natur. Hist.</span></span> xv. 120 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Suetonius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divus Vespasianus</span></span>, 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gentleman's Magazine</span></span>, 1804, p. 909; John Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), iii. 289.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gilbert White, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natural History of Selborne</span></span>, Part II. Letter 28 (Edinburgh, 1829), pp. 239 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Francis Grose, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Provincial Glossary</span></span> (London, 1811), p. 290; J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iii. 287-292; R. Hunt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Romances of the West of England</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1881), pp. 415, 421; W. G. Black, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-medicine</span></span> (London, 1883), pp. 67 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Wollaston Groome, <span class="tei tei-q">“Suffolk Leechcraft,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, vi. (1895) pp. 123 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. S. Hartland, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, vii. (1896) pp. 303-306; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">County Folk-lore, Suffolk</span></span>, edited by Lady E. C. Gurdon (London, 1893) pp. 26-28; Beatrix A. Wherry, <span class="tei tei-q">“Miscellaneous Notes from Monmouthshire,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xvi. (1905) p. 65; Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 320. Sometimes the tree was an oak instead of an ash (M. Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>). To ensure the success of the cure various additional precautions are sometimes recommended, as that the ash should be a maiden, that is a tree that has never been topped or cut; that the split should be made east and west; that the child should be passed into the tree by a maiden and taken out on the other side by a boy; that the child should always be passed through head foremost (but according to others feet foremost), and so forth. In Surrey we hear of a holly-tree being used instead of an ash (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes and Queries</span></span>, Sixth Series, xi. Jan.-Jun. 1885, p. 46).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Some West Sussex superstitions lingering in 1868, collected by Charlotte Latham, at Fittleworth,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Record</span></span>, i. (1878) pp. 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the custom in Germany and Austria, see J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 975 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 317, § 503; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nord-deutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</span></span> (Leipsic, 1848), pp. 443 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. F. L. Woeste, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark</span></span> (Iserlohn, 1848), p. 54; E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), p. 390, § 56; F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii. 301; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, ii. (Munich, 1863) p. 255; J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 415 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. Strackerjan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</span></span> (Oldenburg, 1867), i. 72 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 88; K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii. 290 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 1447; J. Haltrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), p. 264; P. Wagler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</span></span>, i. (Wurzen, 1891) pp. 21-23. As to the custom in France, see Marcellus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De medicamentis</span></span>, xxxiii. 26 (where the tree is a cherry); J. B. Thiers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traité des Superstitions</span></span> (Paris, 1679), pp. 333 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 231; L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bullétins de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</span></span>, iv. série, i. (1890) pp. 895-902; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstitions et Survivances</span></span> (Paris, 1896), i. 523 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the custom in Denmark and Sweden, see J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 976; H. F. Feilberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zwieselbäume nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in Skandinavien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, vii. (1897) pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In Mecklenburg it is sometimes required that the tree should have been split by lightning (K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>). The whole subject of passing sick people through narrow apertures as a mode of cure has been well handled in an elegant little monograph (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Vieux Rite médical</span></span>, Paris, 1892) by Monsieur H. Gaidoz, who rightly rejects the theory that all such passages are symbols of a new birth. But I cannot agree with him in thinking that the essence of the rite consists in the transference of the disease from the person to the tree; rather, it seems to me, the primary idea is that of interposing an impassable barrier between a fugitive and his pursuing foe, though no doubt the enemy thus left behind is apparently supposed to adhere to the further side of the obstacle (whether tree, stone, or what not) through which he cannot pass. However, the sympathetic relation supposed to exist between the sufferer and the tree through which he has been passed certainly favours the view that he has left some portion of himself attached to the tree. But in this as in many similar cases, the ideas in the minds of the persons who practise the custom are probably vague, confused, and inconsistent; and we need not attempt to define them precisely. Compare also R. Andree, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1878), pp. 31 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. S. Hartland, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Legend of Perseus</span></span> (London, 1894-1896), ii. 146 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstitions et Survivances</span></span> (Paris, 1896), i. 523-540.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Strackerjan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, ii. 255; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. F. Feilberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zwieselbäume nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in Skandinavien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, vii. (1897) p. 44.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Theodore Bent, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cyclades</span></span> (London, 1885), pp. 457 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Ploss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Kind</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1884), ii. 221.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Baier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beiträge von der Insel Rügen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, ii. (1855) p. 141.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Manuk Abeghian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der armenische Volksglaube</span></span> (Leipsic, 1899), p. 58.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fr. Kramer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Götzendienst der Niasser,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xxxiii. (1890) pp. 478-480; H. Sundermann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst</span></span> (Barmen, 1905), pp. 81-83. According to the latter writer the intention of passing through the cleft stick is <span class="tei tei-q">“to strip off from himself (<i xml:lang="de">von zich abzustreifen</i>) the last spirit that may have followed him.”</span> The notion that the sun causes death by drawing away the souls of the living is Indian. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Satapatha Brâhmana</span></span>, ii. 3. 3. 7-8, translated by Julius Eggeling, Part I. (Oxford, 1882) p. 343 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. xii.): <span class="tei tei-q">“Now yonder burning (sun) doubtless is no other than Death; and because he is Death, therefore the creatures that are on this side of him die. But those that are on the other side of him are the gods, and they are therefore immortal.... And the breath of whomsoever he (the sun) wishes he takes and rises, and that one dies.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, p. 13 (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association</span></span>, Cardiff meeting, 1891). The Shuswap Indians of the same region also fence their beds against ghosts with a hedge of thorn bushes. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, p. 142.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Hose, <span class="tei tei-q">“In the heart of Borneo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Geographical Journal</span></span>, xvi. (1900) pp. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare C. Hose and W. McDougall, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Pagan Tribes of Borneo</span></span> (London, 1912), ii. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, where, after describing the ceremony of passing through the cloven stick, the writers add: <span class="tei tei-q">“In this way the Kayans symbolically prevent any of the uncanny influences of the graveyard following the party back to the house; though they do not seem to be clear as to whether it is the ghosts of the dead, or the <i>Toh</i> of the neighbourhood, or those which may have contributed to his death, against whom these precautions are taken.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De agri cultura</span></span>, 159 (pp. 106 sq. ed. H. Keil, Leipsic, 1884): <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Luxum siquod est, hac cantione sanum fiet. Harundinem prende tibi viridem P. III. aut quinque longam, mediam diffinde, et duo homines teneant ad coxendices. Incipe cantare in alio s. f. moetas vaeta daries dardaries asiadarides una petes, usque dum coeant. Motas vaeta daries dardares astataries dissunapiter, usque dum coeant. Ferrum insuper jactato. Ubi coierint et altera alteram tetigerint, id manu prehende et dextera sinistra praecide, ad luxum aut ad fracturam alliga, sanum fiet.</i>”</span> The passage is obscure and perhaps corrupt. It is not clear whether <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">usque dum coeant</i>”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">ubi coierint</i>”</span> refer to the drawing together of the bones or of the split portions of the reed, but apparently the reference is to the reed. The charm is referred to by Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span>, xvii. 267: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Quippe cum averti grandines carmine credant plerique, cujus verba inserere non equidem serio ausim, quamquam a Catone proditis contra luxata membra jungenda harundinum fissurae.</i>”</span> Compare J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 186, ii. 1031 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pinabel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes sur quelques peuplades dépendant du Tong-King,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span>, Septième Série, v. (Paris, 1884) p. 430; A. Bourlet, <span class="tei tei-q">“Funérailles chez les Thay,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, viii. (1913) p. 45.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Krascheninnikow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beschreibung des Landes Kamtschatka</span></span> (Lemgo, 1766), pp. 268, 282.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>N. Adriani en Alb. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xlii. (1898) p. 502. The poles are of a certain plant or tree called <i>bomba</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alb. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xliv. (1900) p. 223.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of these ceremonies I may refer to my article, <span class="tei tei-q">“On certain burial customs as illustrative of the primitive theory of the soul,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xv. (1886) pp. 64 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Krascheninnikow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beschreibung des Landes Kamtschatka</span></span> (Lemgo, 1766), pp. 277 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. Furness, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore in Borneo, a Sketch</span></span>, p. 28 (Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899, privately printed). Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</span></span> (Philadelphia, 1902), p. 28: <span class="tei tei-q">“Here a halt for final purification was made. An arch of boughs about five feet high was erected on the beach, and beneath it a fire was kindled, and then Tama Bulan, holding a young chicken, which he waved and brushed over every portion of the arch, invoked all evil spirits which had been accompanying us, and forbade them to follow us further through the fire. The fowl was then killed, its blood smeared all over the archway and sprinkled in the fire; then, led by Tama Bulan, the whole party filed under the arch, and as they stepped over the fire each one spat in it vociferously and immediately took his place in the boats.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 171 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. G. Black, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-medicine</span></span> (London, 1883), p. 70; R. Hunt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Romances of the West of England</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1881), pp. 412, 415; Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 320.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des Provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 152; H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Vieux Rite médical</span></span> (Paris, 1892), pp. 7 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Strausz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Bulgaren</span></span> (Leipsic, 1898), p. 414.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Strausz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 404. As to the Bulgarian custom of creeping through a tunnel in a time of epidemic, see above, vol. i. pp. 282-284.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Last Journals of David Livingstone in Central Africa</span></span> (London, 1874), i. 60.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 343. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxi. (1901) p. 126; id., <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Keysser, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aus dem Leben der Kaileute,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) pp. 141 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Kreemer, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Loeboes in Mandailing,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indie</span></span>, lxvi. (1912) p. 327.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hermann Tönjes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ovamboland, Land, Leute, Mission</span></span> (Berlin, 1911), pp. 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer was unable to ascertain the meaning of the rite; the natives would only say that it was their custom.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Karasek, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Waschambo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baessler-Archiv</span></span>, i. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1911) p. 192.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. F. Feilberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zwieselbäume nebst verwandtem Aberglauben in Skandinavien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, vii. (1897) pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. F. Feilberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 44.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Dalyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Darker Superstitions of Scotland</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1834), p. 121; Ch. Rogers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Social Life in Scotland</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1884-1886), iii. 239.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century</span></span>, edited by A. Allardyce, (Edinburgh and London, 1888), ii. 454. Immediately after mentioning this custom the writer adds: <span class="tei tei-q">“And in Breadalbane it is the custom for the dairymaid to drive the cattle to the sheals with a wand of that tree [the rowan] cut upon the day of removal, which is laid above the door until the cattle be going back again to the winter-town. This was reckoned a preservative against witchcraft.”</span> As to the activity of witches and fairies on Hallowe'en and the first of May, see above, vol. i. pp. 226 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 295; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 52 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. G. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</span></span> (Glasgow, 1900), p. 18; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</span></span> (Glasgow, 1902), p. 270. As to the power of the rowan-tree to counteract their spells, see W. Gregor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes on the Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland</span></span> (London, 1881), p. 188; J. C. Atkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Forty Years in a Moorland Parish</span></span> (London, 1891), pp. 97 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Scapegoat</span></span>, pp. 266 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Strackerjan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</span></span> (Oldenburg, 1867), i. p. 364, § 241.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Strackerjan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. p. 364, § 240.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lieutenant-Colonel H. W. G. Cole, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Lushais,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India</span></span>, 1911, vol. iii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assam</span></span>, Part i. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report</span></span> (Shillong, 1912), p. 140.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Franz Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Eleventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, pp. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science</span></span>, Liverpool meeting, 1896).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. G. E. White, Dean of Anatolia College, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Survivals of Primitive Religion among the People of Asia Minor</span></span>, p. 12 (paper read before the Victoria Institute or Philosophical Society of Great Britain, 6 Adelphi Terrace, Strand, London).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century</span></span>, edited by Alex. Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), ii. 451 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</span></span> (Glasgow, 1902), p. 100.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. James S. Greig, in a letter to me dated Lindean, Perth Road, Dundee, 17th August, 1913.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Borlase, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquities, historical and monumental, of the County of Cornwall</span></span> (London, 1769), pp. 177 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Robert Hunt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Romances of the West of England</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1881), pp. 176, 415.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thomas-de-Saint-Mars, <span class="tei tei-q">“Fête de Saint Estapin,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de la Société Royale des Antiquaires de France</span></span>, i. (1817) pp. 428-430.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Deniker, <span class="tei tei-q">“Dolmen et superstitions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletins et Mémoires de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</span></span>, v. série, i. (1900) p. 111. Compare H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Vieux Rite médical</span></span> (Paris, 1892), pp. 26 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Fouju, <span class="tei tei-q">“Légendes et Superstitions préhistoriques,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue des Traditions Populaires</span></span>, xiv. (1899) pp. 477 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Munich, 1848-1855), ii. 48 § 61.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 431 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Andree-Eysn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volkskundliches aus dem bayrisch-österreichischen Alpengebiet</span></span> (Brunswick, 1910), pp. 1, 9, with the illustrations on pp. 10, 11.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 431.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Theodore Bent, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cyclades</span></span> (London, 1885), p. 437.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Carnoy et J. Nicolaides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions populaires de l'Asie Mineure</span></span> (Paris, 1889), p. 338.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. George E. White (of Marsovan, Turkey), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Present Day Sacrifices in Asia Minor</span></span>, p. 3 (reprinted from <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hartford Seminary Record</span></span>, February 1906).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Central Provinces, Ethnographic Survey</span></span>, vii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Draft Articles on Forest Tribes</span></span> (Allahabad, 1911), p. 46.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So my friend Dr. G. W. Prothero informs me in a letter.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1911</span></span>, vol. xiv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Punjab</span></span>, Part i. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report</span></span>, by Pandit Harikishan Kaul (Lahore, 1912), p. 302.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Vieux Rite médical</span></span> (Paris, 1892), p. 10.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 21.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Vieux Rite médical</span></span> (Paris, 1892), p. 21. Compare J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 975 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. F. Feilberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zwieselbäume nebst verwandtem Aberglaube in Skandinavien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, vii. (1897) p. 45.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Vieux Rite médical</span></span> (Paris, 1892), pp. 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, referring to Nyrop, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dania</span></span>, i. No. 1 (Copenhagen, 1890), pp. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. John Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</span></span> (London, 1822), ii. 346. Among the same people <span class="tei tei-q">“when a person is ill, they bring an ox to the place where he is laid. Two cuts are then made in one of its legs, extending down the whole length of it. The skin in the middle of the leg being raised up, the operator thrusts in his hand, to make way for that of the sick person, whose whole body is afterwards rubbed over with the blood of the animal. The ox after enduring this torment is killed, and those who are married and have children, as in the other case, are the only partakers of the feast.”</span> (J. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 346 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Here the intention seems to be not so much to transfer the disease to the ox, as to transfuse the healthy life of the beast into the veins of the sick man. The same is perhaps true of the Welsh and French cure for whooping-cough, which consists in passing the little sufferer several times under an ass. See J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), iii. 288; L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletins de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</span></span>, Quatrième Série, i. (1890) p. 897; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstitions et Survivances</span></span> (Paris, 1896), i. 526. The same cure for whooping-cough <span class="tei tei-q">“is also practised in Ireland; only here the sufferer is passed round, that is, over and under, the body of an ass”</span> (letter of Miss A. H. Singleton to me, dated Rathmagle House, Abbey-Leix, Ireland, 24th February 1904). But perhaps the intention rather is to give the whooping-cough to the animal; for it might reasonably be thought that the feeble whoop of the sick child would neither seriously impair the lungs, nor perceptibly augment the stentorian bray, of the donkey.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des Veda</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), p. 495. According to a fuller account, Indra drew her through three holes, that of a war-chariot, that of a cart, and that of a yoke. See W. Caland, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altindisches Zauberritual</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1900), p. 31 note 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dr. E. Werner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Im westlichen Finsterregebirge und an der Nordküste von Deutsch-Neuginea,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermanns Mitteilungen</span></span>, lv. (1909) pp. 74 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Among some tribes of South-Eastern Australia it was customary at the ceremonies of initiation to bend growing saplings into arches and compel the novices to pass under them; sometimes the youths had to crawl on the ground to get through. See A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“On some Australian ceremonies of Initiation,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) p. 445; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), p. 536.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy iii. 28, ix. 6, x. 36; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Roman.</span></span> iii. 22. 7. The so-called yoke in this case consisted of two spears or two beams set upright in the ground, with a third spear or beam laid transversely across them. See Livy iii. 28; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy i. 26: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Itaque, ut caedes manifesta aliquo tamen piaculo lueretur, imperatum patri, ut filium expiaret pecunia publica. Is quibusdam piacularibus sacrificiis factis, quae deinde genti Horatiae tradita sunt, transmisso per viam tigillo capite adoperto velut sub jugum misit juvenem. Id hodie quoque publice semper refectum manet; sororium tigillum vocant</i>;”</span> Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Sororium Tigillum,”</span> pp. 297, 307, ed. C. O. Müller (Leipsic, 1839); Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Roman.</span></span> iii. 22. The position of the beam is described exactly by the last of these writers, who had evidently seen it. According to Festus, the yoke under which Horatius passed was composed of three beams, two uprights, and a cross-piece. The similarity of the ceremony to that which was exacted from conquered foes is noted by Dionysius Halicarnasensis as well as by Livy. The tradition of the purification has been rightly explained by Dr. W. H. Roscher with reference to the custom of passing through cleft trees, holed stones, and so on. See W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ausführliches Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. (Leipsic, 1890-1897) col. 21. Compare G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Munich, 1912), p. 104.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natur. Histor.</span></span> xv. 135: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Quia suffimentum sit caedis hostium et purgatio</i>.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Pisonem</span></span>, xxiii. 55; Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bellum Judaicum</span></span>, vii. 5. 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was not till after I had given this conjectural explanation of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Sister's Beam”</span> and the triumphal arch at Rome that I read the article of Mr. W. Warde Fowler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Passing under the Yoke”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Classical Review</span></span>, March 1913, pp. 48-51), in which he quite independently suggests practically the same explanation of both these Roman structures. I have left my exposition, except for one or two trivial verbal changes, exactly as it stood before I was aware that my friend had anticipated me in both conjectures. The closeness of the coincidence between our views is a welcome confirmation of their truth. As to the <i xml:lang="la">Porta Triumphalis</i>, the exact position of which is uncertain, Mr. Warde Fowler thinks that it was not a gate in the walls, but an archway standing by itself in the Campus Martius outside the city walls. He points out that in the oldest existing triumphal arch, that of Augustus at Ariminum, the most striking part of the structure consists of two upright Corinthian pillars with an architrave laid horizontally across them; and he ingeniously conjectures that we have here a reminiscence of the two uprights and the cross-piece, which, if our theory is correct, was the original form both of the triumphal arch and of the yoke.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Professor V. M. Mikhailoviskij, <span class="tei tei-q">“Shamanism in Siberia and European Russia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxiv. (1895) pp. 133, 134.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Yorkshire Legends and Traditions</span></span>, Second Series (London, 1889), pp. 160 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. F. Matthes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Makassaarsch-Hollandsch Woordenboek</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1859), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <i>soemāñgá</i>, p. 569; G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Indische Gids</span></span>, June 1884, p. 933; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), iii. 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. H. Codrington, D.D., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Melanesians</span></span> (Oxford, 1891), pp. 250 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Customs of Mota, Banks Islands,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society of Victoria</span></span>, xvi. (1880) p. 136.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. R. Rivers, <span class="tei tei-q">“Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxix. (1909) p. 177. Dr. Rivers cites a recent case of a man who had a large lizard for his <i>tamaniu</i>. The animal lived in the roots of a big banyan-tree; when the man was ill, the lizard also seemed unwell; and when the man died, the tree fell, which was deemed a sign that the lizard also was dead.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>George Brown, D.D., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Melanesians and Polynesians</span></span> (London, 1910), p. 177. The case was known to Dr. Brown, who made notes of it. The part of Melanesia where it happened was probably the Duke of York Island or New Britain.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“Totemismus auf den Marshall-Inseln (Südsee),”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, viii. (1913) p. 251.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Much of the following evidence has already been cited by me in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 593 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herbert Ward, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Five Years with the Congo Cannibals</span></span> (London, 1890), p. 53.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes Analytiques sur les Collections ethnographiques du Musée du Congo</span></span>, i. (Brussels, 1902-1906) p. 150.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father H. Trilles, <span class="tei tei-q">“Chez les Fangs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xxx. (1898) p. 322; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Totémisme chez les Fâṅ</span></span> (Münster i. W. 1912), pp. 473 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father H. Trilles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Totémisme chez les Fâṅ</span></span> (Münster i. W. 1912), pp. 167 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 438 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 484-489. The description of the rite of blood-brotherhood contracted with the animal is quoted by Father Trilles (pp. 486 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) from a work by Mgr. Buléon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sous le ciel d'Afrique, Récits d'un Missionnaire</span></span>, pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Father Trilles's own observations and enquiries confirm the account given by Mgr. Buléon. But the story of an alliance contracted between a man or woman and a ferocious wild beast and cemented by the blood of the high contracting parties is no doubt a mere fable devised by wizards and witches in order to increase their reputation by imposing on the credulity of the simple.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alfred Mansfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Urwald-Dokumente, vier Jahre unter den Crossflussnegern Kameruns</span></span> (Berlin, 1908), pp. 220 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Keller (missionary), <span class="tei tei-q">“Ueber das Land und Volk der Balong,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsches Kolonialblatt</span></span>, 1 Oktober 1895, p. 484; H. Seidel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ethnographisches aus Nordost Kamerun,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxix. (1896) p. 277.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Note on the Asaba People (Ibos) of the Niger,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxvi. (1906) pp. 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charles Partridge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cross River Natives</span></span> (London, 1905), pp. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in West Africa</span></span> (London, 1897), pp. 459-461. The lamented authoress was kind enough to give me in conversation (1st June 1897) some details which do not appear in her book; among these are the statements, which I have embodied in the text, that the bush soul is never a domestic animal, and that when a man knows what kind of creature his bush soul is, he will not kill an animal of that species and will strongly object to any one else doing so. Miss Kingsley was not able to say whether persons who have the same sort of bush soul are allowed or forbidden to marry each other.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Efik Belief in <span class="tei tei-q">‘Bush-soul,’</span> ”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Man</span></span>, vi. (1906) pp. 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 80. Mr. Henshaw is a member of the highest grade of the secret society of Egbo.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Hugh Goldie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calabar and its Mission</span></span>, New Edition (Edinburgh and London, 1901), pp. 51 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Major A. G. Leonard, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Lower Niger and its Tribes</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 217: <span class="tei tei-q">“When Efik or waterside Ibo see a dead fish floating in the water of the kind called <i>Edidim</i> by the former and <i>Elili</i> by the latter—a variety of the electric species—they believe it to be a bad omen, generally signifying that some one belonging to the house will die, the man who first sees it becoming the victim according to Ibo belief. The only reason that is assigned for this lugubrious forecast is the fact that one of the souls of the departed is in the dead fish—that, in fact, the relationship or affinity existing between the soul essence that had animated the fish and that of one of the members of the household was so intimate that the death of the one was bound to effect the death of the other.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Amaury Talbot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In the Shadow of the Bush</span></span> (London, 1912), pp. 80-87. The Ekoi name for a man who has the power of sending out his spirit into the form of some animal is <i>efumi</i> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, p. 71 note). A certain chief named Agbashan, a great elephant hunter, is believed to have the power of transforming himself into an elephant; and <span class="tei tei-q">“a man of considerable intelligence, educated in England, the brother of a member of the Legislative Council for one of the West African Colonies, offered to take oath that he had seen Agbashan not only in his elephant form, but while actually undergoing the metamorphosis”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). In this case, therefore, the man seems to have felt no scruples at hunting the animals in one of which his own bush soul might be lodged.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of Mr. P. Amaury Talbot to me, dated Eket, North Calabar, Southern Nigeria, April 3d, 1913.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in West Africa</span></span> (London, 1897), pp. 538 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. H. Robinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hausaland</span></span> (London, 1896), pp. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. F. J. Fitzpatrick (Assistant Resident, Northern Nigeria), <span class="tei tei-q">“Some Notes on the Kwolla District and its Tribes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. 37, October, 1910, p. 30.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Extract from a Report by Captain Foulkes to the British Colonial Office. My thanks are due to Mr. N. W. Thomas for sending me the extract and to the authorities of the Colonial Office for their permission to publish it.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Daily Graphic</span></span>, Tuesday, October 7th, 1902, p. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. W. C. Willoughby, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Totemism of the Becwana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxv. (1905) p. 300. The writer adds that he found a similar belief as to the sympathetic relation between a wounded crocodile and the man who wounded it very general among the Wanyamwezi, who, in 1882, were living under Mirambo about two hundred miles south of Lake Victoria Nyanza and a hundred miles east of Lake Tanganyika.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<p>F. Speckmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Hermannsburger Mission in Africa</span></span> (Hermannsburg, 1876) p. 167. Compare David Leslie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</span></span>, Second Edition (Edinburgh, 1875) pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-q">“The Kaffirs believe that after death their spirits turn into a snake, which they call <i>Ehlose</i>, and that every living man has two of these familiar spirits—a good and a bad. When everything they undertake goes wrong with them, such as hunting, cattle-breeding, etc., they say they know that it is their enemies who are annoying them, and that they are only to be appeased by sacrificing an animal; but when everything prospers, they ascribe it to their good <i>Ehlose</i> being in the ascendant”</span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 148: <span class="tei tei-q">“When in battle two men are fighting, their snakes (<i>Mahloze</i>) are poetically said to be twisting and biting each other overhead. One <span class="tei tei-q">‘softens’</span> and goes down, and the man, whose attendant it is, goes down with it. Everything is ascribed to <i>Ehlose</i>. If he fails in anything, his <i>Ehlose</i> is bad; if successful, it is good.... It is this thing which is the inducing cause of everything. In fact, nothing in Zulu is admitted to arise from natural causes; everything is ascribed to witchcraft or the <i>Ehlose</i>.”</span></p>
						<p>It is not all serpents that are <i>amadhlozi</i> (plural of <i>idhlozi</i>), that is, are the transformed spirits of the dead. Serpents which are dead men may easily be distinguished from common snakes, for they frequent huts; they do not eat mice, and they are not afraid of people. If a man in his life had a scar, his serpent after his death will also have a scar; if he had only one eye, his serpent will have only one eye; if he was lame, his serpent will be lame too. That is how you can recognise So-and-So in his serpent form. Chiefs do not turn into the same kind of snakes as ordinary people. For common folk become harmless snakes with green and white bellies and very small heads; but kings become boa-constrictors or the large and deadly black <i>mamba</i>. See Rev. Henry Callaway, M.D., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religions System of the Amazulu</span></span>, Part ii. (Capetown, London, etc., 1869) pp. 134 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 140, 196-202, 205, 208-211, 231. <span class="tei tei-q">“The <i>Ehlose</i> of Chaka and other dead kings is the Boa-constrictor, or the large and deadly black Mamba, whichever the doctors decide. That of dead Queens is the tree Iguana”</span> (David Leslie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 213). Compare Rev. Joseph Shooter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country</span></span> (London, 1857), pp. 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. R. Gordon, <span class="tei tei-q">“Words about Spirits,”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">South African</span></span>) <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Journal</span></span>, ii. (Cape Town, 1880) pp. 101-103; W. Grant, <span class="tei tei-q">“Magato and his Tribe,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxv. (1905) p. 270. A word which is sometimes confounded with <i>idhlozi</i> is <i>itongo</i> (plural <i>amatongo</i>); but the natives themselves when closely questioned distinguish between the two. See Dudley Kidd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Savage Childhood, a Study of Kafir Children</span></span> (London, 1906), pp. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 281-286. The notion that the spirits of the dead appear in the form of serpents is widespread in Africa. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Dr. F. B. Jevons has suggested that the Roman <i xml:lang="la">genius</i>, the guardian-spirit which accompanied a man from birth to death (Censorinus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De die natali</span></span>, 3) and was commonly represented in the form of a snake, may have been an external soul. See F. B. Jevons, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Plutarch's Romane Questions</span></span> (London, 1892) pp. xlvii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Introduction to the History of Religion</span></span> (London, 1896), pp. 186 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Mythologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1881-1883), ii. 195 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Munich, 1912), pp. 176 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. H. Bancroft, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Native Races of the Pacific Coast</span></span> (London, 1875-1876), i. 661. The words quoted by Bancroft (p. 662, note), <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="es">Consérvase entre ellos la creencia de que su vida está unida à la de un animal, y que es forzoso que mueran ellos cuando éste muere</i>,”</span> are not quite accurately represented by the statement of Bancroft in the text. Elsewhere (vol. ii. p. 277) the same writer calls the <span class="tei tei-q">“second self”</span> of the Zapotecs a <span class="tei tei-q">“<i>nagual</i>, or tutelary genius,”</span> adding that the fate of the child was supposed to be so intimately bound up with the fortune of the animal that the death of the one involved the death of the other. Compare Daniel G. Brinton, <span class="tei tei-q">“Nagualism, a Study in American Folk-lore and History,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society held at Philadelphia</span></span>, vol. xxxiii. No. 144 (Philadelphia, January, 1894), pp. 11-73. According to Professor E. Seler the word <i>nagual</i> is akin to the Mexican <i>naualli</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“a witch or wizard,”</span> which is derived from a word meaning <span class="tei tei-q">“hidden”</span> with reference to the power attributed to sorcerers of transforming themselves into animals. See E. Seler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Altmexikanische Studien, II.”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Veröffentlichungen aus dem Königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde</span></span>, vi. heft 2/4 (Berlin, 1899), pp. 52-57.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Otto Stoll, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ethnologie der Indianerstämme von Guatemala</span></span> (Leyden, 1889), p. 57.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thomas Gage, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A New Survey of the West Indies</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1677), p. 334. The same writer relates how a certain Indian named Gonzalez was reported to have the power of turning himself into a lion or rather a puma. Once when a Spaniard had shot a puma in the nose, Gonzalez was found with a bruised face and accused the Spaniard of having shot him. Another Indian chief named Gomez was said to have transformed himself into a puma, and in that shape to have fought a terrific battle with a rival chief named Lopez, who had changed himself into a jaguar. See Gage, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 383-389.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antonio de Herrera, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">General History of the Vast Continent and Islands of America</span></span>, translated by Capt. John Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iv. 138 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The Spanish original of Herrera's history, a work based on excellent authorities, was first published at Madrid in 1601-1615. The Indians of Santa Catalina Istlavacan still receive at birth the name of some animal, which is commonly regarded as their guardian spirit for the rest of their life. The name is bestowed by the heathen priest, who usually hears of a birth in the village sooner than his Catholic colleague. See K. Scherzer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Indianer von Santa Catalina Istlávacana (Frauenfuss), ein Beitrag zur Culturgeschichte der Urbewohner Central-Amerikas,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitzungsberichte der philos. histor. Classe der kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften</span></span> (Vienna), xviii. (1856) p. 235.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Otto Stoll, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ethnologie der Indianerstämme von Guatemala</span></span> (Leyden, 1889), pp. 57 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Suggestion und Hypnotism</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1904), p. 170.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Australian Class Systems,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xviii. (1889) pp. 57 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 148, 150. It is very remarkable that among the Kurnai these fights had a special connexion with marriage. When young men were backward of taking wives, the women used to go out into the forest and kill an emu-wren, which was the men's <span class="tei tei-q">“brother”</span>; then returning to the camp they shewed the dead bird to the men. The result was a fight between the young men and the young women, in which, however, lads who were not yet marriageable might not take part. Next day the marriageable young men went out and killed a superb warbler, which was the women's <span class="tei tei-q">“sister,”</span> and this led to a worse fight than before. Some days afterwards, when the wounds and bruises were healed, one of the marriageable young men met one of the marriageable young women, and said, <span class="tei tei-q">“Superb warbler!”</span> She answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“Emu-wren! What does the emu-wren eat?”</span> To which the young man answered, <span class="tei tei-q">“He eats so-and-so,”</span> naming kangaroo, opossum, emu, or some other game. Then they laughed, and she ran off with him without telling any one. See L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</span></span> (Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane, 1880), pp. 201 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, pp. 149, 273 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Perhaps this killing of the sex-totem before marriage may be related to the pretence of killing young men and bringing them to life again at puberty. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg225">225</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gerard Krefft, <span class="tei tei-q">“Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Lower Murray and Darling,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Philosophical Society of New South Wales</span></span>, 1862-65, pp. 359 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Australian Class Systems,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xviii. (1889) pp. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 57; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, p. 150.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Migrations of the Kurnai Ancestors,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xv. (1886) p. 416.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. W. Schürmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South Australia</span></span> (Adelaide, 1879), p. 241. Compare G. F. Angas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</span></span> (London, 1847), i. 109.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Australian Class Systems,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xviii. (1889) p. 58. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 148-151.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Dawson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Australian Aborigines</span></span> (Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide, 1881), p. 52.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It is at least remarkable that both the creatures thus assigned to the two sexes should be nocturnal in their habits. Perhaps the choice of such creatures is connected with the belief that the soul is absent from the body in slumber. On this hypothesis bats and owls would be regarded by these savages as the wandering souls of sleepers. Such a belief would fully account for the reluctance of the natives to kill them. The Kiowa Indians of North America think that owls and other night birds are animated by the souls of the dead. See James Mooney, <span class="tei tei-q">“Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventeenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</span></span>, Part i. (Washington, 1898) p. 237.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. L. P. Cameron, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiv. (1885) p. 350 note 1; A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Migrations of the Kurnai Ancestors,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xv. (1886) p. 416; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Australian Class Systems,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xviii. (1889) p. 57.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</span></span>, pp. 194, 201, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 215; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xv. 416, xviii. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 148-151.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The following suggestion as to the origin of totemism was made in the first edition of this book (published in 1890) and is here reprinted without any substantial change. In the meantime much additional evidence as to the nature and prevalence of totemism has come to light, and with the new evidence my opinions, or rather conjectures, as to the origin of the institution have repeatedly changed. If I here reprint my earliest conjecture, it is partly because I still think it may contain an element of truth, and partly because it serves as a convenient peg on which to hang a collection of facts which are much more valuable than any theories of mine. The reader who desires to acquaint himself more fully with the facts of totemism and with the theories that have been broached on the subject, will find them stated at length in my <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span> (London, 1910). Here I will only call attention to the Arunta legend that the ancestors of the tribe kept their spirits in certain sacred sticks and stones (<i>churinga</i>), which bear a close resemblance to the well-known bull-roarers, and that when they went out hunting they hung these sticks or stones on certain sacred poles (<i>nurtunjas</i>) which represented their totems. See Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 629. This tradition appears to point to a custom of transferring a man's soul or spirit temporarily to his totem. Conversely when an Arunta is sick he scrapes his <i>churinga</i> and swallows the scrapings, as if to restore to himself the spiritual substance deposited in the instrument. See Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 135 note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(Sir) George Grey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West and Western Australia</span></span> (London, 1841), ii. 228 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</span></span>, p. 169. According to Dr. Howitt, it is a serious offence to kill the totem of another person <span class="tei tei-q">“with intent to injure him”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xviii. (1889) p. 53). Such an intention seems to imply a belief in a sympathetic connexion between the man and the animal. Similarly the Siena of the Ivory Coast, in West Africa, who have totemism, believe that if a man kills one of his totemic animals, a member of his totemic clan dies instantaneously. See Maurice Delafosse, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le peuple Siéna ou Sénoufo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue des Études Ethnographiques et Sociologiques</span></span>, i. (1908) p. 452.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Plato, the different parts of the soul were lodged in different parts of the body (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Timaeus</span></span>, pp. 69<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>-72<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>), and as only one part, on his theory, was immortal, Lucian seems not unnaturally to have interpreted the Platonic doctrine to mean that every man had more than one soul (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Demonax</span></span>, 33).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, iv. (Leyden, 1901) pp. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 70-75.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le sieur de la Borde, <span class="tei tei-q">“Relation de l'Origine, Mœurs, Coustumes, Religion, Guerres et Voyages des Caraibes sauvages des Isles Antilles de l'Amerique,”</span> p. 15, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de divers Voyages faits en Afrique et en l'Amerique</span></span> (Paris, 1684).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washington Matthews, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hidatsa Indians</span></span> (Washington, 1877), p. 50.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Ling Roth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Low's Natives of Borneo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxi. (1892) p. 117; W. W. Skeat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Malay Magic</span></span> (London, 1900), p. 50.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xxxix. (1895) pp. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</span></span>, iii. (Jena, 1867) p. 248.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In some tribes, chiefly of North American Indians, every man has an individual or personal totem in addition to the totem of his clan. This personal totem is usually the animal of which he dreamed during a long and solitary fast at puberty. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 49-52, iii. 370-456, where the relation of the individual or personal totem (if we may call it so) to the clan totem is discussed. It is quite possible that, as some good authorities incline to believe, the clan totem has been developed out of the personal totem by inheritance. See Miss Alice C. Fletcher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Import of the Totem</span></span>, pp. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (paper read before the American Association for the Advancement of Science, August 1887, separate reprint); Fr. Boas, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the United States National Museum for 1895</span></span> (Washington, 1897), pp. 323 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 336-338, 393. In the bush souls of the Calabar negroes (see above, pp. 204 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) we seem to have something like the personal totem on its way to become hereditary and so to grow into the totem of a clan.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Neumann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het Pane- en Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</span></span>, Tweede Serie, dl. iii. Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (1886), pp. 311 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, dl. iv. No. 1 (1887), pp. 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Van Hoëvell, <span class="tei tei-q">“Iets over 't oorlogvoeren der Batta's,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</span></span>, N.S., vii. (1878) p. 434; G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), i. 296, 306 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 309, 325 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. de Backer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Archipel Indien</span></span> (Paris, 1874), p. 470; Col. Yule, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, ix. (1880) p. 295; Joachim Freiherr von Brenner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Besuch bei den Kannibalen Sumatras</span></span> (Würzburg, 1894), pp. 197 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; P. A. L. E. van Dijk, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eenige aanteekeningen omtrent de verschillenden stammen (<i>Margas</i>) en de stamverdeling bij de Battaks,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xxxviii. (1895) pp. 296 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. Joustra, <span class="tei tei-q">“Naar het landschap Goenoeng,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xlv. (1901) pp. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xlvi. (1902) pp. 387 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. E. Neumann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Kemali, Pantang, en Rĕboe bij de Karo-Bataks,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xlviii. (1906) p. 512. See further <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 185 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Hagen, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Battareligion,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xxviii. (1883) p. 514. J. B. Neumann (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> dl. iii. No. 2, pp. 299) is the authority for the seven souls. According to another writer, six out of the seven souls reside outside of the body; one of them dwells in heaven, the remaining five have no definite place of abode, but are so closely related to the man that were they to abandon him his health would suffer. See J. Freiherr von Brenner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Besuch bei den Kannibalen Sumatras</span></span>, pp. 239 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A different account of Batta psychology is given by Mr. Westenberg. According to him, each Batta has only one <i>tendi</i> (not three or seven of them); and the <i>tendi</i> is something between a soul and a guardian spirit. It always resides outside of the body, and on its position near, before, behind, above, or below, the welfare of its owner is supposed in great measure to depend. But in addition each man has two invisible guardian spirits (his <i>kaka</i> and <i>agi</i>) whose help he invokes in great danger; one is the seed by which he was begotten, the other is the afterbirth, and these he calls respectively his elder and his younger brother. Mr. Westenberg's account refers specially to the Karo-Battas. See C. J. Westenberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aanteekeningen omtrent de godsdienstige begrippen der Karo-Bataks,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</span></span>, xli. (1892) pp. 228 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Pagan Tribes of Borneo</span></span> (London, 1912), ii. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>: <span class="tei tei-q">“An important institution among some of the Ibans, which occurs but in rare instances among the other peoples, is the <i>ngarong</i> or secret helper. The <i>ngarong</i> is one of the very few topics in regard to which the Ibans display any reluctance to speak freely. So great is their reserve in this connection that one of us lived for fourteen years on friendly terms with Ibans of various districts without ascertaining the meaning of the word <i>ngarong</i>, or suspecting the great importance of the part played by the notion in the lives of some of these people. The <i>ngarong</i> seems to be usually the spirit of some ancestor or dead relative, but not always so, and it is not clear that it is always conceived as the spirit of a deceased human being. This spirit becomes the special protector of some individual Iban, to whom in a dream he manifests himself, in the first place in human form, and announces that he will be his secret helper.... When, as is most commonly the case, the secret helper takes on the form of some animal, all individuals of that species become objects of especial regard to the fortunate Iban; he will not kill or eat any such animal, and he will as far as possible restrain others from doing so.”</span> Thus the <i>ngarong</i> or secret helper of the Ibans closely resembles what I have called the individual or personal totem.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is not merely the personal name which is often shrouded in mystery (see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 318 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>); the names of the clans and their subdivisions are objects of mysterious reverence among many, if not all, of the Siouan tribes of North America, and are never used in ordinary conversation. See J. Owen Dorsey, <span class="tei tei-q">“Osage Traditions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1888), p. 396. Among the Yuin of South-Eastern Australia <span class="tei tei-q">“the totem name was called <i>Budjan</i>, and it was said to be more like <i>Joïa</i>, or magic, than a name; and it was in one sense a secret name, for with it an enemy might cause injury to its bearer by magic. Thus very few people knew the totem names of others, the name being told to a youth by his father at his initiation”</span> (A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, London, 1904, p. 133).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theodor Benfey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pantschatantra</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), i. 128 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Similarly a man of the Kulin tribe in Victoria was called Kurburu, that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“native bear,”</span> because the spirit of a native bear was supposed to have entered into him when he killed the animal, and to have endowed him with its wonderful cleverness. This I learn from Miss E. B. Howitt's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore and Legends of some Victorian Tribes</span></span> (chapter vi.), which I have been privileged to see in manuscript. Among the Chiquites Indians of Paraguay sickness was sometimes accounted for by supposing that the soul of a deer or a turtle had entered into the patient. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres Édifiantes et Curieuses</span></span>, Nouvelle Édition, viii. (Paris, 1781) p. 339. We have seen (pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg213">213</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) that the Indians of Honduras made an alliance with the animal that was to be their <i>nagual</i> by offering some of their own blood to it. Conversely the North American Indian kills the animal which is to be his personal totem, and thenceforth wears some part of the creature as an amulet (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 50). These facts seem to point to the establishment of a blood covenant, involving an interchange of life between a man and his personal totem or <i>nagual</i>; and among the Fans of West Africa, as we saw (above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg201">201</a>), such a covenant is actually supposed to exist between a sorcerer and his <i>elangela</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. L. P. Cameron, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiv. (1885) pp. 357 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 588 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 213, 453.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), p. 538. As to Daramulun (of whose name Thuremlin is no doubt only a dialectical variation) see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 407, 493, 494 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 497, 499, 500, 507, 523 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 526, 528, 529 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 535, 540, 541, 585 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 587; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“On some Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) pp. 442, 443, 446, 447, 448, 450, 451, 452, 455, 456, 459. On the bull-roarer see Andrew Lang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Custom and Myth</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 29-44; J. D. E. Schmeltz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Schwirrholz</span></span> (Hamburg, 1896); A. C. Haddon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Study of Man</span></span> (London and New York, 1898), pp. 277-327; J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-q">“On some Ceremonies of the Central Australian Aborigines,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science for the Year 1900</span></span> (Melbourne, 1901), pp. 317-322. The religious or magical use of the bull-roarer is best known in Australia. See, for example, L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</span></span> (Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and Brisbane, 1880), pp. 267-269; A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, pp. 354, 509 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 514, 515, 517, 569, 571, 575, 578, 579, 582, 583, 584, 589, 592, 594, 595, 606, 659 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 670, 672, 696, 715; Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 246, 344, 347; W. Baldwin Spencer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Introduction to the Study of Certain Native Tribes of the Northern Territory</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin of the Northern Territory</span></span>, No. 2) (Melbourne, 1912), pp. 19 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 23, 24, 31 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; A. R. Brown, <span class="tei tei-q">“Three Tribes of Western Australia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xliii. (1913) pp. 168, 174; R. Pettazzoni, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mythologie Australienne du Rhombe,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, lxv. (1912) pp. 149-170. But in the essay just referred to Mr. Andrew Lang shewed that the instrument has been similarly employed not only by savages in various parts of the world, but also by the ancient Greeks in their religious mysteries. In the Torres Straits Islands it is used both at the initiation of young men and as a magical instrument. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</span></span>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 217, 218, 219, 328, 330-333, 346, 352. In various parts of New Guinea it is sounded at the initiation of young men and is carefully concealed from women; the sound is thought to be the voice of a spirit. See Rev. J. Chalmers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pioneering in New Guinea</span></span> (London, 1887), p. 85; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Toaripi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxvii. (1898) p. 329; Rev. J. Holmes, <span class="tei tei-q">“Initiation Ceremonies of Natives of the Papuan Gulf,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) pp. 420, 424 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; O. Schellong, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Barlum-fest der Gegend Finsch-hafens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, ii. (1889) pp. 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 154 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. Grabowsky, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Bezirk von Hatzfeldthafen und seine Bewohner,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermanns Mitteilungen</span></span>, xli. (1895) p. 189; B. Hagen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Papua's</span></span> (Wiesbaden, 1899), pp. 188 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Max Krieger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Neu-Guinea</span></span> (Berlin, preface dated 1899), pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Vetter, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</span></span>, xi. (1892) p. 105; K. Vetter, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel, 1897</span></span> (Berlin), p. 93; R. Neuhauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span> (Berlin, 1911), pp. 36, 297, 403, 406 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 410-412, 494 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Otto Reche, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Kaiserin-Augusta-Fluss</span></span> (Hamburg, 1913), pp. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ergebnisse der Südsee-Expedition 1908-1910</span></span>, herausgegeben von G. Thilenius). It is similarly used at the circumcision-festivals in the French Islands, to the west of New Britain (R. Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</span></span>, Stuttgart, 1907, pp. 640 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), and it is employed at mysteries or mourning ceremonies in Bougainville and other Melanesian Islands. See R. Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 658 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Ethnographie der Nordwestlichen Salomo Inseln</span></span> (Berlin, 1899), p. 11; R. H. Codrington, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Melanesians</span></span> (Oxford, 1891), pp. 98 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 342. Among the Minangkabauers of Sumatra the bull-roarer (<i>gasiĕng</i>) is used by a rejected lover to induce the demons to carry off the soul of the jilt and so drive her mad. It is made of the frontal bone of a brave or skilful man, and some of the intended victim's hair is attached to it. See J. L. van der Toorn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer in der Padangsche Bovenlanden,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</span></span>, xxxix. (1890) pp. 55 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Among the Yoruba-speaking negroes of the Slave Coast in West Africa, particularly at Abeokuta, the sound of the bull-roarer is supposed to be the voice of a great bogey named Oro, whose votaries compose a secret society under the name of Ogboni. When the sound of the bull-roarer is heard in the streets, every woman must shut herself up in her house and not look out of the window under pain of death. See R. F. Burton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abeokuta and the Cameroons Mountains</span></span> (London, 1863), i. 197 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>;, Missionary Chautard, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, lv. (Lyons, 1883) pp. 192-198; Missionary Baudin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le Fétichisme,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xvi. (1884) p. 257; P. Bouche, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Côte des Esclaves et le Dahomey</span></span> (Paris, 1885), p. 124; Mrs. R. B. Batty and Governor Moloney, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Yoruba Country,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xix. (1890) pp. 160-164; A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</span></span> (London, 1894), pp. 110 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. H. Stone, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Afric's Forest and Jungle</span></span> (Edinburgh and London, 1900), p. 88; L. Frobenius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Masken und Geheimbünde Afrikas</span></span> (Halle, 1898), pp. 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nova Acta, Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop.-Carol. Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher</span></span>, vol. lxxiv. No. 1). Among the Nandi of British East Africa and the Bushongo of the Congo region bull-roarers are sounded by men to frighten novices at initiation. See A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Nandi</span></span> (Oxford, 1909), pp. 40, 56; E. Torday and T. A. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Bushongo</span></span> (Brussels, 1910), p. 82. Among the Caffres of South Africa and the Boloki of the Upper Congo the bull-roarer is a child's toy, but yet is thought to be endowed with magical virtue. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg232">232</a> note 3. Among the Koskimo Indians of British Columbia the sound of the bull-roarers is supposed to be the voice of a spirit who comes to fetch away the novices. See Franz Boas, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the United States National Museum</span></span> (Washington, 1897), p. 610. The bull-roarer is used as a sacred or magical instrument for the making of rain by the Zuñi and other Pueblo Indians of Arizona and New Mexico, also by the Navajos and Apaches of the same region, and by the Utes of Nevada and Utah. See Dr. Washington Matthews, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Mountain Chant, a Navajo Ceremony,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1887), pp. 435, 436; Captain J. G. Bourke, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Medicine-men of the Apache,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1892), pp. 476-479; Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Zuñi Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Twenty-third Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1904), pp. 115, 117, 128 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 175, 177, 355. The Guatusos of Costa Rica ascertain the will of the deity by listening to the humming sound of the bull-roarer. See Dr. C. Sapper, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ein Besuch bei den Guatusos in Costarica,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxvi. (1899) p. 352; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beiträge zur Ethnographie des südlichen Mittelamerika,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermanns Mitteilungen</span></span>, xlvii. (1901) p. 36. The Caripunas Indians of the Madeira River, in Brazil, sound bull-roarers in lamentations for the dead. See Franz Keller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Amazon and Madeira Rivers</span></span> (London, 1874), p. 124. The Bororo of Brazil also swing bull-roarers at their festivals of the dead; the sound of them is the signal for the women to hide themselves; it is believed that women and children would die if they saw a bull-roarer. See K. von den Steinen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasilien's</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 497-499. The Nahuqua and other Brazilian tribes use bull-roarers in their masked dances, but make no mystery of them. See K. von den Steinen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 327 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the magical use of the bull-roarer, see pp. 230 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Dieri and other Kindred Tribes of Central Australia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xx. (1891) p. 83; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, p. 660. In the latter passage Dr. Howitt omits the not unimportant particular that the bull-roarer is swung for this purpose by the young man <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">before his wounds are healed</span></em>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the desert nature of Central Australia and the magical-like change wrought in its fauna and flora by heavy rain, see Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 170 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 316 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 341 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Howitt and Fison,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xx. (1909) pp. 160, 162 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 164.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain J. G. Bourke, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Medicine-men of the Apache,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1892), pp. 476 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Zuñi Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Twenty-third Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1904), pp. 115, 355.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mrs. Matilda Coxe Stevenson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 175; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 128 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 177.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dr. Washington Matthews, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Navajo Chant,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1887), p. 436; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, p. 435, where the sound of the bull-roarer is said to be <span class="tei tei-q">“like that of a rain storm.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Karl von den Steinen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), p. 328.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</span></span>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) p. 352.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. McCall Theal, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kaffir Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1886), pp. 222 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Records of South-Eastern Africa</span></span>, vii. (1901) p. 456; Dudley Kidd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Essential Kafir</span></span> (London, 1904), p. 333. For an analogous reason among the Boloki of the Upper Congo the elders do not like when boys play with bull-roarers, because the sound resembles the growl of a leopard and will attract these ferocious animals. See Rev. John H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among Congo Cannibals</span></span> (London, 1913), p. 157.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Haddon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Head-hunters, Black, White, and Brown</span></span> (London, 1901), p. 104; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</span></span>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 218, 219; Rev. J. Chalmers, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Natives of Kiwai Island,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxiii. (1903) p. 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Zahn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Jabim,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span> (Berlin, 1911), iii. 333.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 256-258.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This appears to be the view also of Professor K. von den Steinen (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</span></span>, pp. 327 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), who is probably right in thinking that the primary intention of the instrument is to make thunder, and that the idea of making rain is secondary.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“On Australian Medicine Men,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xvi. (1887) pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, p. 596.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, p. 246 note 1; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), p. 497. According to the classificatory system of relationship, which prevails among all the aborigines of Australia, a man may have, and generally has, a number of women who stand to him in the relation of mother as well as of sister, though there need not be a drop of blood in common between them, as we count kin. This explains the reference in the text to a boy's <span class="tei tei-q">“mothers.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 342 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 498.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 498.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 366 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 501.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 373, 501.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, pp. 554-556. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“On some Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) pp. 453 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 523-525; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, 480 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 484, 485, 487, 488; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Across Australia</span></span> (London, 1912), ii. 334 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 480 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the McDonnel Ranges belonging to the Arunta Tribe,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition to Central Australia</span></span>, Part iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropology</span></span> (London and Melbourne, 1896), pp. 180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 523 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Across Australia</span></span> (London, 1912), ii. 335.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 487, 488; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Across Australia</span></span>, ii. 481 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the initiatory rites among the Yabim, see K. Vetter, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</span></span>, 1897, pp. 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</span></span>, xi. (1892) p. 105; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Komm herüber und hilf uns!</span></span> ii. (Barmen, 1898) p. 18; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, cited by M. Krieger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Neu-Guinea</span></span> (Berlin, preface dated 1899), pp. 167-170; O. Schellong, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Barlum-fest der Gegend Finschhafens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, ii. (1889) pp. 145-162; H. Zahn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Jabim,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span> (Berlin, 1911), iii. 296-298. As to the initiatory rites among the Bukaua, see S. Lehner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bukaua,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span>, iii. 402-410; among the Kai, see Ch. Keysser, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aus dem Kai-Leute,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> pp. 34-40; among the Tami, see G. Bamler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Tami,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> pp. 493-507. I have described the rites of the various tribes more in detail in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Belief in Immortality and the Worship of the Dead</span></span>, i. 250-255, 260 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 290 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 301 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In the Bukaua and Tami tribes the initiation ceremonies are performed not in the forest but in a special house built for the purpose in the village, which the women are obliged to vacate till the rites are over.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Belief in Immortality and the Worship of the Dead</span></span>, i. 250, 251, 255, 261, 290 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 301. Among the Bukaua not only does the bull-roarer bear the general name for a ghost (<i>balum</i>), but each particular bull-roarer bears in addition the name of a particular dead man, and varies in dignity and importance with the dignity and importance of the deceased person whom it represents. And besides the big bull-roarers with gruff voices there are little bull-roarers with shrill voices, which represent the shrill-voiced wives of the ancient heroes. See S. Lehner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bukaua,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span>, iii. 410-412.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Pöch, <span class="tei tei-q">“Vierter Bericht über meine Reise nach Neu-Guinea,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitzungsberichte der mathematischen-naturwissenschaftlichen Klasse der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften</span></span> (Vienna), cxv. (1906) Abteilung i. pp. 901, 902.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <span class="tei tei-q">“The <i>Nanga</i> or Sacred Stone Enclosure of Wainimala, Fiji,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiv. (1885) p. 27. The <i>Nanga</i> or sacred enclosure of stones, with its sacred rites, was known only to certain tribes of Fiji (the Nuyaloa, Vatusila, Mbatiwai, and Mdavutukia), who inhabited a comparatively small area, barely a third, of the island of Viti Levu. As to the institution in general, see Rev. Lorimer Fison, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 14-31; A. B. Joske, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Nanga of Viti-levu,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, ii. (1889) pp. 254-266; Basil Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Fijians</span></span> (London, 1908), pp. 146-157. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Belief in Immortality and the Worship of the Dead</span></span>, i. 427-438.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 26; Basil Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> 147.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 27 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The phrase <span class="tei tei-q">“the ancestral gods”</span> is used by Mr. Fison, one of our best authorities on Fijian religion. Mr. Basil Thomson (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 157) questions the accuracy of Mr. Fison's account of this vicarious sacrifice on the ground that every youth was regularly circumcised as a matter of course. But there seems to be no inconsistency between the two statements. While custom required that every youth should be circumcised, the exact time for performing the ceremony need not have been rigidly prescribed; and if a saving or atoning virtue was attributed to the sacrifice of foreskins, it might be thought desirable in cases of emergency, such as serious illness, to anticipate it for the benefit of the sufferer.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to Mr. Fison, the enclosure was divided into three compartments; Mr. Basil Thomson describes only two, though by speaking of one of them as the <span class="tei tei-q">“Middle Nanga”</span> he seems to imply that there were three. The structure was a rough parallelogram lying east and west, about a hundred feet long by fifty feet broad, enclosed by walls or rows of stone slabs embedded endwise in the earth. See Basil Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 147 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Joske, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Nanga of Vitilevu,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, ii. (1889) p. 259; Basil Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Fijians</span></span>, pp. 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to Mr. Fison (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 19) the initiatory ceremonies were held as a rule only every second year; but he adds: <span class="tei tei-q">“This period, however, is not necessarily restricted to two years. There are always a number of youths who are growing to the proper age, and the length of the interval depends upon the decision of the elders.”</span> Perhaps the seeming discrepancy between our authorities on this point may be explained by Mr. Joske's statement (p. 259) that the rites are held in alternate years by two different sets of men, the Kai Vesina and the Kai Rukuruku, both of whom claim to be descended from the original founders of the rites. The custom of dating the New Year by observation of the Pleiades was apparently universal among the Polynesians. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 312 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Lorimer Fison, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 20-23; A. B. Joske, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Basil Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Fijians</span></span>, pp. 150-153. The sacramental character of the meal is recognized by Mr. Fison, who says (p. 23) that after the performance of the rites the novices <span class="tei tei-q">“are now <i>Vīlavóu</i>, accepted members of the <i>Nanga</i>, qualified to take their place among the men of the community, though still only on probation. As children—their childhood being indicated by their shaven heads—they were presented to the ancestors, and their acceptance was notified by what (looking at the matter from the natives' standpoint) we might, without irreverance, almost call the <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">sacrament</span></em> of food and water, too sacred even for the elders' hands to touch.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paul Reina, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ueber die Bewohner der Insel Rook,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</span></span>, N.F., iv. (1858) pp. 356 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Im Bismarck Archipel</span></span> (Leipsic, 1887), pp. 129-134; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 567 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Rev. G. Brown, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Duke of York Group, New Britain, and New Ireland,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, xlvii. (1878) pp. 148 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. H. Romilly, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Islands of the New Britain Group,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S., ix. (1887) pp. 11 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Rev. G. Brown, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> p. 17; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Melanesians and Polynesians</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Powell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wanderings in a Wild Country</span></span> (London, 1883), pp. 60-66; C. Hager, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kaiser Wilhelm's Land und der Bismarck Archipel</span></span> (Leipsic, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 115-128; Hubner, quoted by W. H. Dall, <span class="tei tei-q">“On masks, labrets, and certain aboriginal customs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1884), p. 100; P. A. Kleintitschen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</span></span> (Hiltrup bei Münster, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 350 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Schurtz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altersklassen und Männerbünde</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), pp. 369-377. The inhabitants of these islands are divided into two exogamous classes, which in the Duke of York Island have two insects for their totems. One of the insects is the <i xml:lang="la">mantis religiosus</i>; the other is an insect that mimics the leaf of the horse-chestnut tree very closely. See Rev. B. Danks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Marriage Customs of the New Britain Group,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xviii. (1889) pp. 281 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 118 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. F. Riedel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Galela und Tobeloresen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xvii. (1885) pp. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Kakian association and its initiatory ceremonies have often been described. See François Valentyn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</span></span> (Dordrecht and Amsterdam, 1724-1726), iii. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Von Schmid, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het Kakihansch Verbond op het eiland Ceram,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Neérlands Indië</span></span> (Batavia, 1843), dl. ii. pp. 25-38; A. van Ekris, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het Ceramsche Kakianverbond,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, ix. (1865) pp. 205-226 (repeated with slight changes in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xvi. (1867) pp. 290-315); P. Fournier, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Zuidkust van Ceram,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xvi. (1867) pp. 154-156; W. A. van Rees, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Pionniers der Beschaving in Neêrlands Indië</span></span> (Arnheim, 1867), pp. 92-106; G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de Oeliasers</span></span> (Dordrecht, 1875), pp. 153 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Schulze, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ueber Ceram und seine Bewohner,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</span></span> (1877), p. 117; W. Joest, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Eingebornen der Insel Formosa und Ceram,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> (1882) p. 64; H. von Rosenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Malayische Archipel</span></span> (Leipsic, 1878), p. 318; A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indonesien</span></span>, i. (Berlin, 1884) pp. 145-148; J. G. F. Riedel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</span></span> (The Hague, 1886), pp. 107-111; O. D. Tauern, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ceram,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xlv. (1913) pp. 167 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The best accounts are those of Valentyn, Von Schmid, Van Ekris, Van Rees, and Riedel, which are accordingly followed in the text.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No reason is assigned for this curious choice of a president. Can it have been that, because negro children are born pale or nearly white, an albino was deemed a proper president for a society, all the initiated members of which claimed to have been born again? Speaking of the people of the Lower Congo the old English traveller Andrew Battel observes that <span class="tei tei-q">“the children of this country are born white, but change their colour in two days' time to a perfect black”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“Adventures of Andrew Battel,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, xvi. London, 1814, p. 331).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. J. H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xx. (1909) pp. 189-198; Rev. W. H. Bentley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life on the Congo</span></span> (London, 1887), pp. 78 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pioneering on the Congo</span></span> (London, 1900), i. 284-287. Mr. Weeks's description of the institution is the fullest and I have followed it in the text. The custom was in vogue down to recent years, but seems to have been suppressed chiefly by the exertions of the missionaries. Besides the <i>ndembo</i> guild there is, or was, in these regions another secret society known as the <i>nkimba</i>, which some writers have confused with the <i>ndembo</i>. The <i>nkimba</i> was of a more harmless character than the other; indeed it seems even to have served some useful purposes, partly as a kind of freemasonry which encouraged mutual help among its members, partly as a system of police for the repression of crime, its professed object being to put down witchcraft and punish witches. Only males were admitted to it. Candidates for initiation were stupefied by a drug, but there was apparently no pretence of killing them and bringing them to life again. Members of the society had a home in the jungle away from the town, where the novices lived together for a period varying from six months to two years. They learned a secret language, and received new names; it was afterwards an offence to call a man by the name of his childhood. Instead of the red dye affected by members of the <i>ndembo</i> guild, members of the <i>nkimba</i> guild whitened their bodies with pipe clay and wore crinolines of palm frondlets. See Rev. W. H. Bentley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life on the Congo</span></span>, pp. 80-83; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pioneering on the Congo</span></span>, i. 282-284; Rev. J. H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 198-201; (Sir) H. H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Visit to Mr. Stanley's Stations on the River Congo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N. S. v. (1883) pp. 572 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Delmar Morgan, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Lower Congo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, N.S. vi. (1884) p. 193. As to these two secret societies on the Lower Congo, see further (Sir) H. H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Races of the Congo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) pp. 472 sq.; É. Dupont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres sur le Congo</span></span> (Paris, 1889), pp. 96-100; Herbert Ward, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Five Years with the Congo Cannibals</span></span> (London, 1890), pp. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Ethnographical Notes relating to the Congo Tribes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxiv. (1895) pp. 288 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. J. Glave, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Six Years of Adventure in Congo Land</span></span> (London, 1893), pp. 80-83; L. Frobenius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Masken und Geheimbünde Afrikas</span></span> (Halle, 1898), pp. 43-54 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nova Acta. Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop. Carol. Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher</span></span>, vol. lxxiv. No. 1); H. Schurtz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altersklassen und Männerbünde</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), pp. 433-437; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes Annalytiques sur les Collections Ethnographiques du Musée du Congo</span></span> (Brussels, 1902-1906), pp. 199-206; Ed. de Jonghe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Sociétés Secrètes au Bas-Congo</span></span> (Brussels, 1907), pp. 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (extract from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue des Questions Scientifiques</span></span>, October 1907). Some of these writers do not discriminate between the two societies, the <i>ndembo</i> and the <i>nkimba</i>. According to our best authorities (Messrs. Bentley and Weeks) the two societies are quite distinct and neither of them has anything to do with circumcision, which is, however, prevalent in the region. See Rev. J. H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xx. (1909) pp. 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> A secret society of the Lower Congo which Adolf Bastian has described under the name of <i>quimba</i> is probably identical with the <i>nkimba</i>. He speaks of a <span class="tei tei-q">“Secret Order of those who have been born again,”</span> and tells us that the candidates <span class="tei tei-q">“are thrown into a death-like state and buried in the fetish house. When they are wakened to life again, they have (as in the Belliparo) lost their memory of everything that is past, even of their father and mother, and they can no longer remember their own name. Hence new names are given them according to the titles or ranks to which they are advanced.”</span> See A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</span></span> (Jena, 1874-1875), ii. 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ein Besuch in San Salvador</span></span> (Bremen, 1859), pp. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</span></span>, ii. 183. Elsewhere Bastian says that about San Salvador lads at puberty are secluded in the forest and circumcised, and during their seclusion <span class="tei tei-q">“each of them is mystically united to the fetish by which his life is henceforth determined, as the Brahman whispers the secret charm in the ear of him who has been born again.”</span> See A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ein Besuch in San Salvador</span></span> (Bremen, 1859), pp. 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Trilles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Totémisme chez les Fâṅ</span></span> (Münster i. W., 1912), pp. 479 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer speaks of the guardian spirit as the individual totem of the young warrior.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Dapper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description de l'Afrique</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1686), pp. 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Dapper's account has been abridged in the text.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in West Africa</span></span> (London, 1867), p. 531. Perhaps the smearing with clay may be intended to indicate that the novices have undergone the new birth; for the negro child, though born reddish-brown, soon turns slaty-grey (E. B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropology</span></span>, London, 1881, p. 67), which would answer well enough to the hue of the clay-bedaubed novices.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thomas Winterbottom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Account of the Native Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone</span></span> (London, 1803), pp. 135 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare John Matthews, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Voyage to the River Sierra-Leone</span></span> (London, 1791), pp. 82-85; J. B. L. Durand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage au Sénégal</span></span> (Paris, 1802), pp. 183 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (whose account is copied without acknowledgment from Matthews). The <i>purra</i> or <i>poro</i> society also exists among the Timmes of Sierra Leone; in this tribe the novices are sometimes secluded from their families for ten years in the wood, they are tattooed on their backs and arms, and they learn a language which consists chiefly of names of plants and animals used in special senses. Women are not admitted to the society. See Zweifel et Moustier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Voyage aux sources du Niger,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), VI. Série, xv. (1878) pp. 108 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. J. Alldridge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Sherbro and its Hinterland</span></span> (London, 1901), p. 130. This work contains a comparatively full account of the <i>purra</i> or <i>poro</i> society (pp. 124-131) and of the other secret societies of the country (pp. 131-149, 153-159). Compare L. Frobenius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Masken und Geheimbünde Afrikas</span></span> (Halle, 1898), pp. 138-144 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nova Acta, Abh. der Kaiserl. Leop.-Carol. Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher</span></span>, vol. lxxiv. No. 1).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thomas Winterbottom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Account of the Native Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone</span></span> (London, 1803), pp. 137-139. As to the <i>semo</i> or <i>simo</i> society see further L. Frobenius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 130-138.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Extract from a letter of Mr. A. C. Hollis to me. Mr. Hollis's authority is Dr. T. W. W. Crawford of the Kenia Medical Mission.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Scoresby Routledge and Katherine Routledge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">With a Prehistoric People, the Akikuyu of British East Africa</span></span> (London, 1910), p. 152. Compare C. W. Hobley, <span class="tei tei-q">“Kikuyu Customs and Beliefs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xl. (1910) p. 441.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mr. A. W. McGregor, of the Church Missionary Society, quoted by W. S. Routledge and K. Routledge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">With a Prehistoric People</span></span>, p. 151, note. 1. Mr. McGregor <span class="tei tei-q">“has resided amongst the Akikuyu since 1901. He has by his tact and kindness won the confidence of the natives, and is the greatest authority on their language”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, p. xxi).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. S. Routledge and K. Routledge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 151.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. G. Dale, <span class="tei tei-q">“An Account of the principal Customs and Habits of the Natives inhabiting the Bondei Country,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxv. (1896) p. 189.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Torday et T. A. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Bushongo</span></span> (Brussels, 1910), pp. 82-85. As for the title <span class="tei tei-q">“God on Earth,”</span> applied to the principal chief or king, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, p. 53.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(Beverley's) <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Virginia</span></span> (London, 1722), pp. 177 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare J. Bricknell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natural History of North Carolina</span></span> (Dublin, 1737), pp. 405 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Carver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels through the Interior Parts of North America</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1781), pp. 271-275. The thing thrown at the man and afterwards vomited by him was probably not a bean but a small white sea-shell (<i xml:lang="la">Cypraea moneta</i>). See H. R. Schoolcraft, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Tribes of the United States</span></span> (Philadelphia, 1853-1856), iii. 287; J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kitschi-Gami</span></span> (Bremen, 1859), i. 71; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1891), pp. 191, 215; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1896), p. 101.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Carver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 277 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. R. Schoolcraft, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Tribes of the United States</span></span>, iii. 287 (as to the Winnebagoes), v. 430 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (as to the Chippeways and Sioux); J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kitschi-Gami</span></span>, i. 64-70 (as to the Ojebways). For a very detailed account of the Ojebway ceremonies, see W. J. Hoffman, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Midewiwin or Grand Medicine Society of the Ojibwa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1891), especially pp. 215 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 234 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 248, 265. For similar ceremonies among the Menomini, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Menomini Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fourteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1896), pp. 99-102; and among the Omahas, see J. Owen Dorsey, <span class="tei tei-q">“Omaha Sociology,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1884), pp. 342-346. I have dealt more fully with the ritual in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, iii. 462 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare also P. Radin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ritual and Significance of the Winnebago Medicine Dance,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of American Folk-lore</span></span>, xxiv. (1911) pp. 149-208.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. H. Pond, <span class="tei tei-q">“Dakota superstitions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Collections of the Minnesota Historical Society for the year 1867</span></span> (Saint Paul, 1867), pp. 35, 37-40. A similar but abridged account of the Dakota tradition and usage is given by S. R. Riggs in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dakota Grammar, Texts, and Ethnography</span></span> (Washington, 1893), pp. 227-229 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contributions to North American Ethnology</span></span>, vol. ix.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the Adventures and Sufferings of John R. Jewitt</span></span> (Middletown, 1820), p. 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Id.</span></span>, p. 44. For the age of the prince, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, p. 35.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. J. Holmberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ueber die Völker des russischen Amerika,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae</span></span>, iv. (Helsingfors, 1856) pp. 292 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 328; Ivan Petroff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report on the Population, Industries and Resources of Alaska</span></span>, pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. Krause, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Tlinkit-Indianer</span></span> (Jena, 1885), p. 112; R. C. Mayne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Four Years in British Columbia and Vancouver Island</span></span> (London, 1862), pp. 257 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 268; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, iii. 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association</span></span>, Leeds meeting, 1890); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the United States National Museum for 1895</span></span>; (Washington, 1897), pp. 632 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> But while the initiation described in the text was into a wolf society, not into a wolf clan, it is to be observed that the wolf is one of the regular totems of the Nootka Indians. See Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, p. 32.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tenth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 58 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association</span></span>, Ipswich meeting, 1895). It is remarkable, however, that in this tribe persons who are being initiated into the secret societies, of which there are six, are not always or even generally brought back by an artificial animal which represents their own totem. Thus while men of the eagle totem are brought back by an eagle which rises from underground, men of the bear clan return on the back of an artificial killer-whale which is towed across the river by ropes. Again, members of the wolf clan are brought back by an artificial bear, and members of the raven clan by a frog. In former times the appearance of the artificial totem animal, or of the guardian spirit, was considered a matter of great importance, and any failure which disclosed the deception to the uninitiated was deemed a grave misfortune which could only be atoned for by the death of the persons concerned in the disclosure.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg213">213</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the opinion of Dr. F. Boas, who writes: <span class="tei tei-q">“The close similarity between the clan legends and those of the acquisition of spirits presiding over secret societies, as well as the intimate relation between these and the social organizations of the tribes, allow us to apply the same argument to the consideration of the growth of the secret societies, and lead us to the conclusion that the same psychical factor that molded the clans into their present shape molded the secret societies”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the United States National Museum for 1895</span></span>, p. 662). Dr. Boas would see in the acquisition of a <i>manitoo</i> or personal totem the origin both of the secret societies and of the totem clans; for according to him the totem of the clan is merely the <i>manitoo</i> or personal totem of the ancestor transmitted by inheritance to his descendants. As to personal totems or guardian spirits (<i>manitoos</i>) among the North American Indians, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, iii. 370 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; as to their secret societies, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, iii. 457 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; as to the theory that clan totems originated in personal or individual totems, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, iv. 48 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. G. Morice, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes, archaeological, industrial, and sociological, on the Western Dénés,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Canadian Institute</span></span>, iv. (1892-93) pp. 203-206. The honorific totems of the Carrier Indians may perhaps correspond in some measure to the sub-totems or multiplex totems of the Australians. As to these latter see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 78 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 133 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg153">153</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Teit, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Thompson Indians of British Columbia</span></span>, p. 357 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History</span></span>, April, 1900). Among the Shuswap of British Columbia, when a young man has obtained his personal totem or guardian spirit, he is supposed to become proof against bullets and arrows (Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sixth Report of the Committee on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, p. 93, separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association</span></span>, Leeds meeting, 1890).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. R. Schoolcraft, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Tribes of the United States</span></span> (Philadelphia, 1853-1856), v. 683. In a letter dated 16th Dec. 1887, Mr. A. S. Gatschet, formerly of the Bureau of Ethnology, Washington, wrote to me: <span class="tei tei-q">“Among the Toukawe whom in 1884 I found at Fort Griffin [?], Texas, I noticed that they never kill the big or grey wolf, <i>hatchukunän</i>, which has a mythological signification, <span class="tei tei-q">‘holding the earth’</span> (<i>hatch</i>). He forms one of their totem clans, and they have had a dance in his honor, danced by the males only, who carried sticks.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Laws of Manu</span></span>, ii. 169, translated by G. Bühler (Oxford, 1886), p. 61 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. xxv.); J. A. Dubois, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des Peuples de l'Inde</span></span> (Paris, 1825), i. 125; Monier Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religious Thought and Life in India</span></span> (London, 1883), pp. 360 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 396 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des Veda</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 466 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lampridius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commodus</span></span>, 9; C. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gnostics and their Remains</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1887), pp. 127, 129. Compare Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs aux mystères de Mithra</span></span>, i. (Brussels, 1899) pp. 69 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 321 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Rohde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903), ii. 400 n. 1; A. Dieterich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Eine Mithrasliturgie</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903), pp. 91, 157 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg110">110</a>; compare pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg107">107</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg120">120</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg132">132</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg133">133</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg120">120</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg106">106</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg145">145</a>. In the myth the throwing of the weapons and of the mistletoe at Balder and the blindness of Hother who slew him remind us of the custom of the Irish reapers who kill the corn-spirit in the last sheaf by throwing their sickles blindfold at it. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 144. In Mecklenburg a cock is sometimes buried in the ground and a man who is blindfolded strikes at it with a flail. If he misses it, another tries, and so on till the cock is killed. See K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii. 280. In England on Shrove Tuesday a hen used to be tied upon a man's back, and other men blindfolded struck at it with branches till they killed it. See T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">British Popular Customs</span></span> (London, 1876), p. 68. W. Mannhardt (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Korndämonen</span></span>, Berlin, 1868, pp. 16 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) has made it probable that such sports are directly derived from the custom of killing a cock upon the harvest-field as a representative of the corn-spirit. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 277 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> These customs, therefore, combined with the blindness of Hother in the myth, suggest that the man who killed the human representative of the oak-spirit was blindfolded, and threw his weapon or the mistletoe from a little distance. After the Lapps had killed a bear—which was the occasion of many superstitious ceremonies—the bear's skin was hung on a post, and the women, blindfolded, shot arrows at it. See J. Scheffer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lapponia</span></span> (Frankfort, 1673), p. 240.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxiv. 12; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 1010. Compare below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg282">282</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Satapatha Brahmana</span></span>, xii. 7. 3. 1-3, translated by J. Eggeling, Part v. (Oxford, 1900) pp. 222 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. xliv.); Denham Rouse, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Journal</span></span>, vii. (1889) p. 61, quoting <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taittīrya Brāhmana</span></span>, I. vii. 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Col. E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Kols of Chota-Nagpore,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Ethnological Society</span></span>, N.S. vi. (1868) p. 36.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jens Kamp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Danske Folkeminder</span></span> (Odense, 1877), pp. 172, 65 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, referred to in Feilberg's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bidrag til en Ordbog over Jyske Almuesmål</span></span>, Fjerde hefte (Copenhagen, 1888), p. 320. For a sight of Feilberg's work I am indebted to the kindness of the late Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo, who pointed out the passage to me.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Kristensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iydske Folkeminder</span></span>, vi. 380, referred to by Feilberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span> According to Marcellus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Medicamentis</span></span>, xxvi. 115), ivy which springs from an oak is a remedy for stone, provided it be cut with a copper instrument.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gütersloh, 1886), pp. 175 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, quoting Dybeck's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Runa</span></span>, 1845, pp. 62 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 176.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted by A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Zimbales, a province of the Philippine Islands, <span class="tei tei-q">“a certain parasitic plant that much resembles yellow moss and grows high up on trees is regarded as a very powerful charm. It is called <i>gay-u-ma</i>, and a man who possesses it is called <i>nanara gayuma</i>. If his eyes rest on a person during the new moon he will become sick at the stomach, but he can cure the sickness by laying hands on the afflicted part.”</span> See W. A. Reed, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Negritos of Zambales</span></span> (Manilla, 1904), p. 67 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Department of the Interior, Ethnological Survey Publications</span></span>, vol. ii. part i.). Mr. Reed seems to mean that if a man who possesses this parasitic plant sees a person at the new moon, the person on whom his eye falls will be sick in his stomach, but that the owner of the parasite can cure the sufferer by laying his (the owner's) hands on his (the patient's) stomach. It is interesting to observe that the magical virtue of the parasitic plant appears to be especially effective at the new moon.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 97 § 128; L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), p. 269. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg086">86</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Hay Allan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Bridal of Caölchairn</span></span> (London, 1822), pp. 337 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. John B. Pratt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Buchan</span></span>, Second Edition (Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and London, 1859), p. 342. <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The corbie roup</span></span>”</span> means <span class="tei tei-q">“the raven croak.”</span> In former editions of this work my only source of information as to the mistletoe and oak of the Hays was an extract from a newspaper which was kindly copied and sent to me, without the name of the newspaper, by the late Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo. For my acquaintance with the works of J. H. Allan and J. B. Pratt I am indebted to the researches of my learned friend Mr. A. B. Cook, who has already quoted them in his article <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-God,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xvii. (1906) pp. 318 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Martin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span> (London, 1808-1814), iii. 661.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, xxi. (London, 1805), p. 1470: <span class="tei tei-q">“The Misseltoe is celebrated in story as the sacred plant of the Druids, and the Golden Bough of Virgil, which was Aeneas's passport to the infernal regions.”</span> Again, the author of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexicon Mythologicum</span></span> concludes, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">cum Jonghio nostro</i>,”</span> that the Golden Bough <span class="tei tei-q">“was nothing but the mistletoe glorified by poetical license.”</span> See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Edda Rhythmica seu Antiquior, vulgo Saemundina dicta</span></span>, iii. (Copenhagen, 1828) p. 513 note. C. L. Rochholz expresses the same opinion (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</span></span>, Berlin, 1867, i. 9). The subject is discussed at length by E. Norden, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">P. Vergilius Maro, Aeneis Buch VI.</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903) pp. 161-171, who, however, does not even mention the general or popular view (<i xml:lang="la">publica opinio</i>) current in the time of Servius, that the Golden Bough was the branch which a candidate for the priesthood of Diana had to pluck in the sacred grove of Nemi. I confess I have more respect for the general opinion of antiquity than to dismiss it thus cavalierly without a hearing.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 203 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, compare 136 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> See Note IV. <span class="tei tei-q">“The Mistletoe and the Golden Bough”</span> at the end of this volume.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 378 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Virgil (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 201 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) places the Golden Bough in the neighbourhood of Lake Avernus. But this was probably a poetical liberty, adopted for the convenience of Aeneas's descent to the infernal world. Italian tradition, as we learn from Servius (on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 136), placed the Golden Bough in the grove at Nemi.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 186, 366 note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A custom of annually burning or otherwise sacrificing a human representative of the corn-spirit has been noted among the Egyptians, Pawnees, and Khonds. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 238 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 245 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 259 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> We have seen that in Western Asia there are strong traces of a practice of annually burning a human god. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 98 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The Druids appear to have eaten portions of the human victim (Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxx. 13). Perhaps portions of the flesh of the King of the Wood were eaten by his worshippers as a sacrament. We have found traces of the use of sacramental bread at Nemi. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It has been said that in Welsh a name for mistletoe is <span class="tei tei-q">“the tree of pure gold”</span> (<i xml:lang="cy">pren puraur</i>). See J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 1009, referring to Davies. But my friend Sir John Rhys tells me that the statement is devoid of foundation.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<p>Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>:—</p>
						<p>
							<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Latet arbore opaca</span><br/>
							<span style="font-style: italic">Aureus et foliis et lento vimine ramus.</span></span>”</span>
						</p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This suggestion as to the origin of the name has been made to me by two correspondents independently. Miss Florence Grove, writing to me from 10 Milton Chambers, Cheyne Walk, London, on May 13th, 1901, tells me that she regularly hangs up a bough of mistletoe every year and allows it to remain till it is replaced by the new branch next year, and from her observation <span class="tei tei-q">“the mistletoe is actually a golden bough when kept a sufficiently long time.”</span> She was kind enough to send me some twigs of her old bough, which fully bore out her description. Again, Mrs. A. Stuart writes to me from Crear Cottage, Morningside Drive, Edinburgh, on June 26th, 1901: <span class="tei tei-q">“As to why the mistletoe might be called the Golden Bough, my sister Miss Haig wishes me to tell you that last June, when she was in Brittany, she saw great bunches of mistletoe hung up in front of the houses in the villages. The leaves were <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">bright golden</span></em>. You should hang up a branch next Christmas and keep it till June!”</span> The great hollow oak of Saint-Denis-des-Puits, in the French province of Perche, is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the gilded or golden oak”</span> (<i xml:lang="fr">Chêne-Doré</i>) <span class="tei tei-q">“in memory of the Druidical tradition of the mistletoe cut with a golden sickle.”</span> See Felix Chapiseau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</span></span> (Paris, 1902), i. 97. Perhaps the name may be derived from bunches of withered mistletoe shining like gold in the sunshine among the branches.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bulletin critique de la Mythologie Gauloise,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1880) p. 76.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg291">291</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg065">65</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span> (Prague and Leipsic, 1864), p. 97, § 673.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-703" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 97, § 676; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 94, § 123; I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 158, § 1350.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-704" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Russwurm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aberglaube in Russland,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859), pp. 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Angelo de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie des Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 146.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-705" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions et Superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1882), ii. 336; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1886), p. 217.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-706" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. E. Waldfreund, <span class="tei tei-q">“Volksgebräuche und Aberglauben in Tirol und dem Salzburger Gebirg,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iii. (1855), p. 339.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-707" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Runge, <span class="tei tei-q">“Volksglaube in der Schweiz,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859), p. 175.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-708" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Frh. von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</span></span> (Prague, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 311 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Theodor Vernaleken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Oesterreich</span></span> (Vienna, 1859), pp. 309 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. Töppen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben aus Masuren</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Danzig, 1867), pp. 72 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Even without the use of fern-seed treasures are sometimes said to bloom or burn in the earth, or to reveal their presence by a bluish flame, on Midsummer Eve; in Transylvania only children born on a Sunday can see them and fetch them up. See J. Haltrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), p. 287; I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1871), p. 159, §§ 1351, 1352; K. Bartsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebrauche aus Mecklenburg</span></span> (Vienna, 1879-1880), ii. 285, § 1431; E. Monseur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore Wallon</span></span> (Brussels, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 6, § 1789; K. Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span> (Leipsic, 1862-1863), i. 231 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 275; A. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1869), p. 76, § 92; F. J. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 363.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-709" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 103, § 882; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, i. (1853), p. 330; W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), p. 265. At Pergine, in the Tyrol, it was thought that fern-seed gathered with the dew on St. John's night had the power of transforming metals (into gold?). See Ch. Schneller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Märchen und Sagen aus Wälschtirol</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1867), p. 237, § 23.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-710" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I. V. Zingerle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 190 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 1573.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-711" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Schlossar, <span class="tei tei-q">“Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube aus der deutschen Steiermark,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, N.R., xxiv. (1891) p. 387.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-712" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ernst Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 242-244.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-713" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span>, p. 97, § 675; W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1872), p. 98; C. Russwurm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aberglaube in Russland,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</span></span>, iv. (1859) p. 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-714" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Bechstein, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsches Sagenbuch</span></span> (Leipsic, 1853), p. 430, No. 500; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Thüringer Sagenbuch</span></span> (Leipsic, 1885), ii. pp. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 161.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-715" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For gathering it at midsummer, see above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg086">86</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The custom of gathering it at Christmas still commonly survives in England. At York <span class="tei tei-q">“on the eve of Christmas-day they carry mistletoe to the high altar of the cathedral, and proclaim a public and universal liberty, pardon and freedom to all sorts of inferior and even wicked people at the gates of the city, toward the four quarters of heaven.”</span> See W. Stukeley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Medallic History of Marcus Aurelius Valerius Carausius, Emperor in Britain</span></span> (London, 1757-1759), ii. 164; J. Brand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</span></span> (London, 1882-1883), i. 525. This last custom, which is now doubtless obsolete, may have been a relic of an annual period of license like the Saturnalia. The traditional privilege accorded to men of kissing any woman found under mistletoe is probably another relic of the same sort. See Washington Irving, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sketch-Book</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Christmas Eve,”</span> p. 147 (Bohn's edition); Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-716" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. A. Afzelius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volkssagen und Volkslieder aus Schwedens älterer und neuerer Zeit</span></span> (Leipsic, 1842), i. 41 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 289; L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), pp. 266 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> See above, p. 69. In the Tyrol they say that if mistletoe grows on a hazel-tree, there must be a treasure under the tree. See J. N. Ritter von Alpenburg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Sagen Tirols</span></span> (Zurich, 1857), p. 398. In East Prussia a similar belief is held in regard to mistletoe that grows on a thorn. See C. Lemke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</span></span> (Mohrungen, 1884-1887), ii. 283. We have seen that the divining-rod which reveals treasures is commonly cut from a hazel (above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg067">67</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-717" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg090">90-92</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-718" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fern-seed is supposed to bloom at Easter as well as at Midsummer and Christmas (W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span>, pp. 98 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>); and Easter, as we have seen, is one of the times when fires are ceremonially kindled, perhaps to recruit the fire of the sun.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-719" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F. Jackson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Shropshire Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1883), p. 242.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-720" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Trevelyan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore and Folk-stories of Wales</span></span> (London, 1909), p. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-721" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xvi. 251.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-722" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg082">82</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-723" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxxiii. 94: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Calx aqua accenditur et Thracius lapis, idem oleo restinguitur, ignis autem aceto maxime et visco et ovo.</i>”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-724" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg085">85</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-725" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 179-209.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-726" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 384-416.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-727" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg086">86</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg282">282</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-728" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg085">85</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-729" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, x. 30. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-730" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Six, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Eriphyle des Polygnot,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen des kaiserlich deutschen Archaeologischen Instituts, Athenische Abtheilung</span></span>, xix. (1894) pp. 338 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare my commentary on Pausanias, vol. v. p. 385.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-731" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The sarcophagus is in the Lateran Museum at Rome. See W. Helbig, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Führer durch die öffentlichen Sammlungen Klassischer Altertümer in Rom</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1899), ii. 468.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-732" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 19 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-733" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Edda</span></span>, übersetzt von K. Simrock<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">8</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1882), p. 264.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-734" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Powers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes of California</span></span> (Washington, 1877), p. 171.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-735" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Powers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes of California</span></span>, p. 287.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-736" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Max Girschner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Karolineninsel Namöluk und ihre Bewohner,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baessler-Archiv</span></span>, ii. (1912) p. 141.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-737" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. A. Macdonell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vedic Mythology</span></span> (Strasburg, 1897), pp. 91 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, referring to <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rigveda</span></span>, vi. 3. 3, x. 79. 7, ii. 1. 14, iii. 1. 13, x. 1. 2, viii. 43. 9, i. 70. 4, ii. 1. 1. Compare H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des Veda</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 120 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-738" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Edward M. Curr, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Australian Race</span></span> (Melbourne and London, 1886-1887), i. 9, 18.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-739" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Mooney, <span class="tei tei-q">“Myths of the Cherokee,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</span></span>, Part i. (Washington, 1900) p. 422, compare p. 435.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-740" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Teit, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Thompson Indians of British Columbia</span></span>, p. 346 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History</span></span>, April, 1900).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-741" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Teit, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 374.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-742" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Shuswap Indians of British Columbia entertain a similar belief. It has been suggested that the fancy may be based on the observation that cold follows a thunder-storm. See G. M. Dawson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Shuswap people of British Columbia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada</span></span>, ix. (1891) Section ii. p. 38.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-743" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Wuttke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sächsische Volkskunde</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Dresden, 1901), p. 369.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-744" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Henri A. Junod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Life of a South African Tribe</span></span> (Neuchatel, 1912-1913), ii. 291. The Thonga imagine that lightning is caused by a great bird, which sometimes buries itself in the ground to a depth of several feet. See H. A. Junod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 290 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-745" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dr. James A. Chisholm (of the Livingstonia Mission, Mwenzo, N.E. Rhodesia), <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Winamwanga and Wiwa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. 36 (July, 1910), p. 363.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-746" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Powers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes of California</span></span> (Washington, 1877), p. 287. The dread of lightning is prominent in some of the customs observed in Patiko, a district of the Uganda Protectorate. If a village has suffered from lightning, ropes made of twisted grass are strung from peak to peak of the houses to ward off further strokes. And if a person has been struck or badly shaken, <span class="tei tei-q">“an elaborate cure is performed upon him. A red cock is taken, his tongue torn out, and his body dashed upon the house where the stroke fell. Then the scene changes to the bank of a small running stream, where the patient is made to kneel while the bird is sacrificed over the water. A raw egg is next given to the patient to swallow, and he is laid on his stomach and encouraged to vomit. The lightning is supposed to be vomited along with the egg, and all ill effects prevented.”</span> See Rev. A. L. Kitching, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">On the Backwaters of the Nile</span></span> (London, 1912), p. 263.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-747" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-748" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Warde Fowler, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Oak and the Thunder-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, xvi. (1913) pp. 318 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> My friend Mr. Warde Fowler had previously called my attention to the facts in a letter dated September 17th, 1912.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-749" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dr. W. Schlich's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Manual of Forestry</span></span>, vol. iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Forest Protection</span></span>, by W. R. Fisher, Second Edition (London, 1907), pp. 662 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Mr. W. Warde Fowler was the first to call the attention of mythologists to this work.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-750" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Experiments on the conductivity of electricity in wood go to shew that starchy trees (oak, poplar, maples, ash, elm, <i xml:lang="la">sorbus</i>) are good conductors, that oily trees (beech, walnut, birch, lime) are bad conductors, and that the conifers are intermediate, the Scotch pine in summer being as deficient in oil as the starchy trees, but rich in oil during winter. It was found that a single turn of Holz's electric machine sufficed to send the spark through oakwood, but that from twelve to twenty turns were required to send it through beech-wood. Five turns of the machine were needed to send the spark through poplar and willow wood. See Dr. W. Schlich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Manual of Forestry</span></span>, vol. iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Forest Protection</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1907), p. 664. In the tropics lightning is said to be especially attracted to coco-nut palms. See P. Amaury Talbot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In the Shadow of the Bush</span></span> (London, 1913), p. 73.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-751" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the Greek belief and custom, see H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kleine Schriften</span></span>, iv. (Leipsic and Berlin, 1913), <span class="tei tei-q">“Keraunos,”</span> pp. 471 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 361. As to the Roman belief and custom, see Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">svv.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fulguritum and Provorsum fulgur</span></span>, pp. 92, 229, ed. C. O. Müller (Leipsic, 1839); H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, vol. ii. pars i. (Berlin, 1902) pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, Nos. 3048-3056; L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Mythologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1881-1883), i. 190-193; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Munich, 1912), pp. 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> By a curious refinement the Romans referred lightning which fell by day to Jupiter, but lightning which fell by night to a god called Summanus (Festus, p. 229).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-752" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> iii. 64, citing a statement that lightning strikes twenty oaks for one beech. The statistics adduced by Mr. W. Warde Fowler seem to shew that this statement is no exaggeration but rather the contrary.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-753" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Warde Fowler, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Oak and the Thunder-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, xvi. (1913) pp. 317-320.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-754" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 356 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-755" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The suggestion is Mr. W. Warde Fowler's (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op cit.</span></span> pp. 319 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-756" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natur. Hist.</span></span> xvi. 249.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-757" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg085">85</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-758" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 153. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg085">85</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-759" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This interpretation of Balder's death was anticipated by W. Schwartz (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Ursprung der Mythologie</span></span>, Berlin, 1860, p. 176), who cut the whole knot by dubbing Balder <span class="tei tei-q">“the German thunder-and-lightning god”</span> and mistletoe <span class="tei tei-q">“the wonderful thunder-and-lightning flower.”</span> But as this learned writer nursed a fatal passion for thunder and lightning, which he detected lurking in the most unlikely places, we need not wonder that he occasionally found it in places where there were some slight grounds for thinking that it really existed.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-760" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the relation of the priest to Jupiter, and the equivalence of Jupiter and Juno to Janus (Dianus) and Diana, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 376 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-761" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-q">“I quite agree how humiliating the slow progress of man is, but every one has his own pet horror, and this slow progress or even personal annihilation sinks in my mind into insignificance compared with the idea or rather I presume certainty of the sun some day cooling and we all freezing. To think of the progress of millions of years, with every continent swarming with good and enlightened men, all ending in this, and with probably no fresh start until this our planetary system has been again converted into red-hot gas. <i xml:lang="la">Sic transit gloria mundi</i>, with a vengeance”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">More Letters of Charles Darwin</span></span>, edited by Francis Darwin, London, 1903, i. 260 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-762" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Since this passage was written the hope which it expresses has been to some extent strengthened by the discovery of radium, which appears to prolong indefinitely the prospect of the duration of the sun's heat, and with it the duration of life on its attendant planets. See (Sir) George Howard Darwin's Presidential Address to the British Association, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the 75th Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science</span></span> (South Africa, 1905), pp. 28 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. Soddy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Interpretation of Radium</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1912), pp. 240 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; E. Rutherford, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Radio-active Substances and their Radiations</span></span> (Cambridge, 1913), pp. 653-656. At the same time it should be borne in mind that even if the atomic disintegration and accompanying liberation of energy, which characterize radium and kindred elements, should prove to be common in different degrees to all the other elements and to form a vast and till lately unsuspected store of heat to the sun, this enormous reserve of fuel would only defer but could not avert that final catastrophe with which the solar system and indeed the whole universe is remorselessly threatened by the law of the dissipation of energy.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-763" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, vol. i. pp. 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-764" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexander Carmichael, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Carmina Gadelica, Hymns and Incantations with Illustrative Notes on Words, Rites, and Customs, dying and obsolete: orally collected in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland and translated into English</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1900), ii. 312.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-765" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-766" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The late Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., <span class="tei tei-q">“Religion and Customs of the Uraons,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span>, vol. i. No. 9 (Calcutta, 1906), p. 141.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-767" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“Every clan (<i>Familienstamm</i>) has a definite thing which is forbidden to all the members of the clan, whether it be a particular kind of meat, or a certain fish, or as here the stalk of a gourd.”</span>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-768" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“The place in Nguu, where the ghost is said to dwell.”</span>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-769" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<span class="tei tei-q">“In Ukami.”</span>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-770" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Velten, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schilderungen der Suaheli</span></span> (Göttingen, 1901), pp. 195-197.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-771" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Alice Werner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natives of British Central Africa</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 82. In a letter Miss Werner tells me that she learned these particulars at Blantyre in 1893, and that the chief lived in the neighbourhood of Mlanje.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-772" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. Henry Rowley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Twenty Years in Central Africa</span></span> (London, N.D.), pp. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> For a reference to this and all the other works cited in this Note I am indebted to the kindness of Miss Alice Werner.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-773" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rev. David Clement Scott, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Cyclopaedic Dictionary of the Mang'anja Language spoken in British Central Africa</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1892), p. 315.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-774" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Edward Steere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Swahili Tales</span></span> (London, 1870), pp. 441-453. The young man in the story is spoken of now as the nephew and now as the son of the man he murdered. Probably he was what we should call a nephew or brother's son of his victim; for under the classificatory system of relationship, which seems to prevail among the Bantu stock, to whom the Swahili belong, a man regularly calls his paternal uncle his father.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-775" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, vol. i. pp. 104 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-776" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>
						<p>Virgil, Aen. vi. 205 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>:—</p>
						<p>
							<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quale solet silvis brumali frigore viscum</span><br/>
							<span style="font-style: italic">Fronde virere nova, quod non sua seminat arbos,</span><br/>
							<span style="font-style: italic">Et croceo fetu teretis circumdare truncos:</span><br/>
							<span style="font-style: italic">Talis erat species auri frondentis opaca</span><br/>
							<span style="font-style: italic">Ilice, sic leni crepitabat bractea vento.</span></span>”</span>
						</p>
						<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-777" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Schlich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Manual of Forestry</span></span>, vol. iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Forest Protection</span></span>, by W. R. Fisher, M.A., Second Edition (London, 1907), p. 412. French peasants about Coulommiers think that mistletoe springs from birds' dung. See H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bulletin critique de la Mythologie Gauloise,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, ii. (1880) p. 76. The ancients were well aware that mistletoe is propagated from tree to tree by seeds which have been voided by birds. See Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Causis Plantarum</span></span>, ii. 17. 5; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Naturalis Historia</span></span>, xvi. 247. Pliny tells us that the birds which most commonly deposited the seeds were pigeons and thrushes. Can this have been the reason why Virgil (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 190 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) represents Aeneas led to the Golden Bough by a pair of doves?<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-778" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, xxi. (London, 1805) p. 1470.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-779" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Fraas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Synopsis Plantarum Florae Classicae</span></span> (Munich, 1845), p. 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-780" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. O. Lenz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Botanik der alten Griechen und Römer</span></span> (Gotha, 1859), p. 597, quoting Pollini.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-781" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Lindley and T. Moore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Treasury of Botany</span></span>, New Edition (London, 1874), ii. 1220. A good authority, however, observes that mistletoe is <span class="tei tei-q">“frequently to be observed on the branches of old apple-trees, hawthorns, lime-trees, oaks, etc., where it grows parasitically.”</span> See J. Sowerby, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Botany</span></span>, xxi. (London, 1805) p. 1470.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-782" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>, Ninth Edition, x. 689, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Gloucester.”</span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-783" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Gaidoz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bulletin critique de la Mythologie Gauloise,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, ii. (1880) pp. 75 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-784" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Angelo de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Mythologie des Plantes</span></span> (Paris, 1878-1882), ii. 216 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the many curious superstitions that have clustered round mandragora, see P. J. Veth, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Mandragora,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1894) pp. 199-205; C. B. Randolph, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Mandragora of the Ancients in Folk-lore and Medicine,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences</span></span>, vol. xl. No. 12 (January, 1905), pp. 487-537.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-785" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Schlich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Manual of Forestry</span></span>, vol. iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Forest Protection</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1907), pp. 415-417.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-786" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. B. Stebbing, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Loranthus Parasite of the Moru and Ban Oaks,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span>, New Series, v. (Calcutta, 1910) pp. 189-195. The <i xml:lang="la">Loranthus vestitus</i> <span class="tei tei-q">“is a small branching woody plant with dirty yellowish green leaves which are dark shining green above. It grows in great clumps and masses on the trees, resembling a giant mistletoe. The fruit is yellowish and fleshy, and is almost sessile on the stem, which it thickly studs”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span>, p. 192). The writer shews that the parasite is very destructive to oaks in India.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-787" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. O. Lenz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Botanik der alten Griechen und Römer</span></span> (Gotha, 1859), p. 598, notes 151 and 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-788" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Fraas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Synopsis Plantarum Florae Classicae</span></span> (Munich, 1845), p. 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-789" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. O. Lenz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Botanik der alten Griechen und Römer</span></span> (Gotha, 1859), pp. 599 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-790" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Plantarum</span></span>, iii. 7. 5, iii. 16. 1, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Causis Plantarum</span></span>, ii. 17; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xvi. 245-247. Compare Dioscorides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De materia medica</span></span>, ii. 93 (103), vol. i. pp. 442 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ed. C. Sprengel (Leipsic, 1829-1830), who uses the form <i xml:lang="el">ixos</i> instead of <i xml:lang="el">ixia</i>. Both Dioscorides (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) and Plutarch (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coriolanus</span></span>, 3) affirm that mistletoe (<i xml:lang="el">ixos</i>) grows on the oak (δρῦς); and Hesychius quotes from Sophocles's play <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Meleager</span></span> the expression <span class="tei tei-q">“mistletoe-bearing oaks”</span> (ἰξοφόρους δρύας, Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-791" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Opera quae supersunt omnia</span></span>, ed. Fr. Wimmer (Paris, 1866), pp. 537, 545, 546, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.vv.</span></span> ἰξία, στελίς, ὑφέαρ.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-792" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Fraas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Synopsis Plantarum Florae Classicae</span></span> (Munich, 1845), p. 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-793" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. O. Lenz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Botanik der alten Griechen und Römer</span></span> (Gotha, 1859), p. 597, notes 147 and 148.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-794" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Causis Plantarum</span></span>, ii. 17. 2, ἐπεὶ τό γε τὴν μὲν ἀείφυλλον εἶναι τῶν ἰξιῶν (τὴν δὲ φυλλοβόλον) οὐθὲν ἄτοπον, κἂν ἡ μὲν (ἐν) ἀιφύλλοις ἡ δὲ ἐν φυλλοβόλοις ἐμβιῴη.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-795" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>His letter is undated, but the postmark is April 28th, 1889. Sir Francis Darwin has since told me that his authority is Kerner von Marilaun, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pflanzenleben</span></span> (1888), vol. i. pp. 195, 196. See Anton Kerner von Marilaun, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natural History of Plants</span></span>, translated and edited by F. W. Oliver (London, 1894-1895), i. 204 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> According to this writer <span class="tei tei-q">“the mistletoe's favourite tree is certainly the Black Poplar (<i xml:lang="la">Populus nigra</i>). It flourishes with astonishing luxuriance on the branches of that tree.... Mistletoe has also been found by way of exception upon the oak and the maple, and upon old vines”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 205).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-796" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prof. P. J. Veth, <span class="tei tei-q">“De leer der signatuur, III. De mistel en de riembloem,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</span></span>, vii. (1894) p. 105. The Dutch language has separate names for the two species: mistletoe is <i xml:lang="nl">mistel</i>, and <i xml:lang="la">Loranthus</i> is <i xml:lang="nl">riembloem</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-797" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>His letter is dated 18th February, 1908.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-798" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>But Sir Francis Darwin writes to me:—<span class="tei tei-q">“I do not quite see why <i xml:lang="la">Loranthus</i> should not put out leaves in winter as easily as <i xml:lang="la">Viscum</i>, in both cases it would be due to unfolding leaf buds; the fact that <i xml:lang="la">Viscum</i> has adult leaves at the time, while <i xml:lang="la">Loranthus</i> has not, does not really affect the matter.”</span> However, Mr. Paton tells us, as we have just seen, that in winter the <i xml:lang="la">Loranthus</i> growing on the oaks of Mount Athos has no leaves, though its yellow berries are very conspicuous.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-799" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
