<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>III</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="book-4-3" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 6.00em">
				<div class="tei tei-div" id="footnotes" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
					<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
						<span style="font-size: 173%">Footnotes</span>
					</h1>
					<dl class="tei tei-list-footnotes">
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_1" id="note_1" name="note_1">1.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As in the present volume I am concerned with the beliefs and practices of Orientals I may quote the following passage from one who has lived long in the East and knows it well: <span class="tei tei-q">“The Oriental mind is free from the trammels of logic. It is a literal fact that the Oriental mind can accept and believe two opposite things at the same time. We find fully qualified and even learned Indian doctors practising Greek medicine, as well as English medicine, and enforcing sanitary restrictions to which their own houses and families are entirely strangers. We find astronomers who can predict eclipses, and yet who believe that eclipses are caused by a dragon swallowing the sun. We find holy men who are credited with miraculous powers and with close communion with the Deity, who live in drunkenness and immorality, and who are capable of elaborate frauds on others. To the Oriental mind, a thing must be incredible to command a ready belief”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“Riots and Unrest in the Punjab, from a correspondent,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Times Weekly Edition</span></span>, May 24, 1907, p. 326). Again, speaking of the people of the Lower Congo, an experienced missionary describes their religious ideas as <span class="tei tei-q">“chaotic in the extreme and impossible to reduce to any systematic order. The same person will tell you at different times that the departed spirit goes to the nether regions, or to a dark forest, or to the moon, or to the sun. There is no coherence in their beliefs, and their ideas about cosmogony and the future are very nebulous. Although they believe in punishment after death their faith is so hazy that it has lost all its deterrent force. If in the following pages a lack of logical unity is observed, it must be put to the debit of the native mind, as that lack of logical unity really represents the mistiness of their views.”</span> See Rev. John H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xx. (1909) pp. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Unless we allow for this innate capacity of the human mind to entertain contradictory beliefs at the same time, we shall in vain attempt to understand the history of thought in general and of religion in particular.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_2" id="note_2" name="note_2">2.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The equivalence of Tammuz and Adonis has been doubted or denied by some scholars, as by Renan (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span>, Paris, 1864, pp. 216, 235) and by Chwolsohn (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</span></span>, St. Petersburg, 1856, ii. 510). But the two gods are identified by Origen (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Selecta in Ezechielem</span></span>, Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xiii. 797), Jerome (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist.</span></span> lviii. 3 and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentar. in Ezechielem</span></span>, viii. 13, 14, Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xxii. 581, xxv. 82), Cyril of Alexandria (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Isaiam</span></span>, lib. ii. tomus. iii., and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Comment. on Hosea</span></span>, iv. 15, Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, lxx. 441, lxxi. 136), Theodoretus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Ezechielis cap.</span></span> viii., Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, lxxxi. 885), the author of the Paschal Chronicle (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xcii. 329) and Melito (in W. Cureton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spicilegium Syriacum</span></span>, London, 1855, p. 44); and accordingly we may fairly conclude that, whatever their remote origin may have been, Tammuz and Adonis were in the later period of antiquity practically equivalent to each other. Compare W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studien zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span> (Leipsic, 1876-1878), i. 299; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Realencyclopädie für protestantische Theologie und Kirchengeschichte</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Tammuz”</span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span> (Leipsic, 1911), pp. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span> (Berlin, 1877), pp. 273 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ch. Vellay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le dieu Thammuz,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, xlix. (1904) pp. 154-162. Baudissin holds that Tammuz and Adonis were two different gods sprung from a common root (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, p. 368). An Assyrian origin of the cult of Adonis was long ago affirmed by Macrobius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sat.</span></span> i. 21. 1). On Adonis and his worship in general see also F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. (Bonn, 1841) pp. 191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. H. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span> (Berlin, 1841), ii. 536 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ch. Vellay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le culte et les fêtes d' Adonis-Thammouz dans l'Orient antique</span></span> (Paris, 1904).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_3" id="note_3" name="note_3">3.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The mourning for Adonis is mentioned by Sappho, who flourished about 600 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> See Th. Bergk's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Poetae Lyrici Graeci</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> iii. (Leipsic, 1867) p. 897; Pausanias, ix. 29. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_4" id="note_4" name="note_4">4.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2 (Berlin, 1909), pp. 394 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 65 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_5" id="note_5" name="note_5">5.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, ed. T. K. Cheyne and J. S. Black, iii. 3327. In the Old Testament the title <i xml:lang="he">Adoni</i>, <span class="tei tei-q">“my lord,”</span> is frequently given to men. See, for example, Genesis xxxiii. 8, 13, 14, 15, xlii. 10, xliii. 20, xliv. 5, 7, 9, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_6" id="note_6" name="note_6">6.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span> (Gotha, 1896-1903), i. 134 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique, les Origines</span></span> (Paris, 1895), pp. 550 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian Religion and Mythology</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A History of Sumer and Akkad</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Winckler, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das alte Testament</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 349; Fr. Hommel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients</span></span> (Munich, 1904), pp. 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2 (Berlin, 1909), pp. 401 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the hypothesis that the Sumerians were immigrants from Central Asia, see L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Sumer and Akkad</span></span>, pp. 351 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The gradual desiccation of Central Asia, which is conjectured to have caused the Sumerian migration, has been similarly invoked to explain the downfall of the Roman empire; for by rendering great regions uninhabitable it is supposed to have driven hordes of fierce barbarians to find new homes in Europe. See Professor J. W. Gregory's lecture <span class="tei tei-q">“Is the earth drying up?”</span> delivered before the Royal Geographical Society and reported in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Times</span></span>, December 9th, 1913. It is held by Prof. Hommel (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 19 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) that the Sumerian language belongs to the Ural-altaic family, but the better opinion seems to be that its linguistic affinities are unknown. The view, once ardently advocated, that Sumerian was not a language but merely a cabalistic mode of writing Semitic, is now generally exploded.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_7" id="note_7" name="note_7">7.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der babylonische Gott Tamüz,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der philologisch-historischen Klasse der Königl. Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften</span></span>, xxvii. No. xx. (Leipsic, 1909) pp. 701, 722.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_8" id="note_8" name="note_8">8.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Dumu-zi</span></span>, or in fuller form <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Dumuzi-abzu</span></span>. See P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und Epen</span></span> (Berlin, 1900), p. 560; H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 703 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), p. 397; P. Dhorme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion Assyro-Babylonienne</span></span> (Paris, 1910), p. 105; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span> (Leipsic, 1911), p. 104.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_9" id="note_9" name="note_9">9.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der babylonische Gott Tamüz,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandl. d. Kön. Sächs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften</span></span>, xxvii. No. xx. (Leipsic, 1909) p, 723. For the text and translation of the hymns, see H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sumerisch-babylonische Tamüzlieder,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Berichte über die Verhandlungen der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Philologisch-historische Klasse</span></span>, lix. (1907) pp. 201-252. Compare H. Gressmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altorientalische Texte und Bilder</span></span> (Tübingen, 1909), i. 93 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span> (Leipsic, 1911), pp. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. W. Rogers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cuneiform Parallels to the Old Testament</span></span> (Oxford, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 179-185.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_10" id="note_10" name="note_10">10.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Jeremias, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die babylonisch-assyrischen Vorstellungen vom Leben nach dem Tode</span></span> (Leipsic, 1887), pp. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 808, iii. 258 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span> (Boston, 1898), pp. 565-576, 584, 682 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. L. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian Religion and Mythology</span></span>, pp. 178-183; P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und Epen</span></span>, pp. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 169; R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span> (New York, 1901), pp. 316 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 338, 408 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 397 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 561 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sumerisch-babylonische Tamūzlieder,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Berichte über die Verhandlungen der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Philologisch-historische Klasse</span></span>, lix. (1907) pp. 220, 232, 236 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der babylonische Gott Tamūz,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der philologisch-historischen Klasse der Königl. Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften</span></span>, xxvii. No. xx. (Leipsic, 1909) pp. 725 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 729-735; H. Gressmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altorientalische Texte und Bilder zum Alten Testamente</span></span> (Tübingen, 1909), i. 65-69; R. W. Rogers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cuneiform Parallels to the Old Testament</span></span> (Oxford, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 121-131; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span> (Leipsic, 1911), pp. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 353 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> According to Jerome (on Ezekiel viii. 14) the month of Tammuz was June; but according to modern scholars it corresponded rather to July, or to part of June and part of July. See F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 210; F. Lenormant, <span class="tei tei-q">“Il mito di Adone-Tammuz nei documenti cuneiformi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Atti del IV. Congresso Internazionale degli Orientalisti</span></span> (Florence, 1880), i. 144 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte, p. 275; Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Months,”</span> iii. 3194. My friend W. Robertson Smith informed me that owing to the variations of the local Syrian calendars the month of Tammuz fell in different places at different times, from midsummer to autumn, or from June to September. According to Prof. M. Jastrow, the festival of Tammuz was celebrated just before the summer solstice (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 547, 682). He observes that <span class="tei tei-q">“the calendar of the Jewish Church still marks the 17th day of Tammuz as a fast, and Houtsma has shown that the association of the day with the capture of Jerusalem by the Romans represents merely the attempt to give an ancient festival a worthier interpretation.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_11" id="note_11" name="note_11">11.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel viii. 14.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_12" id="note_12" name="note_12">12.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 14. 4; Bion, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Idyl</span></span>, i., J. Tzetzes. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 831; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 503 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Aristides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apology</span></span>, edited by J. Rendel Harris (Cambridge, 1891), pp. 44, 106 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Babylonian texts relating to Tammuz no reference has yet been found to death by a boar. See H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sumerisch-babylonische Tamūzlieder,”</span> p. 451; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der babylonische Gott Tamūz,”</span> p. 731. Baudissin inclines to think that the incident of the boar is a late importation into the myth of Adonis. See his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 142 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the relation of the boar to the kindred gods Adonis, Attis, and Osiris see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, where I have suggested that the idea of the boar as the foe of the god may be based on the terrible ravages which wild pigs notoriously commit in fields of corn.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_13" id="note_13" name="note_13">13.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span> (Leipsic, 1911), pp. 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with plate iv. As to the representation of the myth of Adonis on Etruscan mirrors and late works of Roman art, especially sarcophaguses and wall-paintings, see Otto Jahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archäologische Beiträge</span></span> (Berlin, 1847), pp. 45-51.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_14" id="note_14" name="note_14">14.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The ancients were aware that the Syrian and Cyprian Aphrodite, the mistress of Adonis, was no other than Astarte. See Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura deorum</span></span>, iii. 23. 59; Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mensibus</span></span>, iv. 44. On Adonis in Phoenicia see W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span> (Leipsic, 1911), pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_15" id="note_15" name="note_15">15.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to Cinyras, see F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 238 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 2. 226-231; W. H. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span> (Berlin, 1841), i. 168-173, ii. 94-136; Stoll, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kinyras,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1189 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Melito calls the father of Adonis by the name of Cuthar, and represents him as king of the Phoenicians with his capital at Gebal (Byblus). See Melito, <span class="tei tei-q">“Oration to Antoninus Caesar,”</span> in W. Cureton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spicilegium Syriacum</span></span> (London, 1855), p. 44.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_16" id="note_16" name="note_16">16.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philo of Byblus, quoted by Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praeparatio Evangelii</span></span>, i. 10; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. 568; Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Βύβλος. Byblus is a Greek corruption of the Semitic Gebal (גבל), the name which the place still retains. See E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span> (Paris, 1864), p. 155.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_17" id="note_17" name="note_17">17.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Pietschmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Phoenizier</span></span> (Berlin, 1889), p. 139. On the coins it is designated <span class="tei tei-q">“Holy Byblus.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_18" id="note_18" name="note_18">18.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xvi. 1. 18, p. 755.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_19" id="note_19" name="note_19">19.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_20" id="note_20" name="note_20">20.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The sanctuary and image are figured on coins of Byblus. See T. L. Donaldson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Architectura Numismatica</span></span> (London, 1859), pp. 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span>, p. 177; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iii. (Paris, 1885) p. 60; R. Pietschmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Phoenizier</span></span>, p. 202; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1897) p. 173. Renan excavated a massive square pedestal built of colossal stones, which he thought may have supported the sacred obelisk (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 174-178).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_21" id="note_21" name="note_21">21.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_22" id="note_22" name="note_22">22.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xvi. 1. 18, p. 755.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_23" id="note_23" name="note_23">23.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 8; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> v. 78; E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span>, pp. 282 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_24" id="note_24" name="note_24">24.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eustathius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentary on Dionysius Periegetes</span></span>, 912 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geographi Graeci Minores</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, ii. 376); Melito, in W. Cureton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spicilegium Syriacum</span></span>, p. 44.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_25" id="note_25" name="note_25">25.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel xxvii. 9. As to the name Gebal see above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg013">13</a>, note 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_26" id="note_26" name="note_26">26.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. B. Paton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Early History of Syria and Palestine</span></span> (London, 1902), pp. 169-171. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg075">75</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_27" id="note_27" name="note_27">27.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. B. Paton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 235; R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span>, p. 57 (the Nimrud inscription of Tiglath-pileser III.).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_28" id="note_28" name="note_28">28.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The inscription was discovered by Renan. See Ch. Vellay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le culte et les fêtes d'Adonis-Thammouz dans l'Orient antique</span></span> (Paris, 1904), pp. 38 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span> (Oxford 1903), No. 3, pp. 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In the time of Alexander the Great the king of Byblus was a certain Enylus (Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, ii. 20), whose name appears on a coin of the city (F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, ii. 1, p. 103, note 81).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_29" id="note_29" name="note_29">29.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the divinity of Semitic kings and the kingship of Semitic gods see W. R. Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1894), pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 66 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_30" id="note_30" name="note_30">30.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Radau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Early Babylonian History</span></span> (New York and London, 1900), pp. 307-317; P. Dhorme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion Assyro-Babylonienne</span></span> (Paris, 1910), pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_31" id="note_31" name="note_31">31.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The evidence for this is the Moabite stone, but the reading of the inscription is doubtful. See S. R. Driver, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Mesha,”</span> vol. iii. 3041 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes on the Hebrew Text and the Topography of the Books of Samuel</span></span>, Second Edition (Oxford, 1913), pp. lxxxv., lxxxvi., lxxxviii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 1, pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_32" id="note_32" name="note_32">32.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings viii. 7, 9, xiii. 24 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Jeremiah xlix. 27. As to the god Hadad see Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn</span></span>, i. 23. 17-19 (where, as so often in late writers, the Syrians are called Assyrians); Philo of Byblus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. 569; F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span> (Berlin, 1888), pp. 66-68; G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, Nos. 61, 62, pp. 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 164, 173, 175; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1905), pp. 93, 493, 496 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The prophet Zechariah speaks (xii. 11) of a great mourning of or for Hadadrimmon in the plain of Megiddon. This has been taken to refer to a lament for Hadad-Rimmon, the Syrian god of rain, storm, and thunder, like the lament for Adonis. See S. R. Driver's note on the passage (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Minor Prophets</span></span>, pp. 266 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Century Bible</span></span>); W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, p. 92.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_33" id="note_33" name="note_33">33.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Jud.</span></span> ix. 4. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_34" id="note_34" name="note_34">34.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Genesis xxxvi. 35 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; 1 Kings xi. 14-22; 1 Chronicles i. 50 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Of the eight kings of Edom mentioned in Genesis (xxxvi. 31-39) and in 1 Chronicles (i. 43-50) not one was the son of his predecessor. This seems to indicate that in Edom, as elsewhere, the blood royal was traced in the female line, and that the kings were men of other families, or even foreigners, who succeeded to the throne by marrying the hereditary princesses. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The Israelites were forbidden to have a foreigner for a king (Deuteronomy xvii. 15 with S. R. Driver's note), which seems to imply that the custom was known among their neighbours. It is significant that some of the names of the kings of Edom seem to be those of divinities, as Prof. A. H. Sayce observed long ago (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lectures on the Religion of the Ancient Babylonians</span></span>, London and Edinburgh, 1887, p. 54).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_35" id="note_35" name="note_35">35.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> Nos. 62, 63, pp. 163, 165, 173 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 496 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The god Rekub-el is mentioned along with the gods Hadad, El, Reshef, and Shamash in an inscription of King Bar-rekub's mortal father, King Panammu (G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> No. 61, p. 161).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_36" id="note_36" name="note_36">36.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> i. 729 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with Servius's note; Silius Italicus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Punica</span></span>, i. 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_37" id="note_37" name="note_37">37.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel xxviii. 2, 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_38" id="note_38" name="note_38">38.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Menander of Ephesus, quoted by Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Apionem</span></span>, i. 18 and 21; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iv. 446 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to the text of Josephus, as edited by B. Niese, the names of the kings in question were Abibal, Balbazer, Abdastart, Methusastart, son of Leastart, Ithobal, Balezor, Baal, Balator, Merbal. The passage of Menander is quoted also by Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chronic.</span></span> i. pp. 118, 120, ed. A. Schoene.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_39" id="note_39" name="note_39">39.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 36, p. 102. As to Melcarth, the Tyrian Hercules, see Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Melqart,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 2650 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> One of the Tyrian kings seems to have been called Abi-milk (Abi-melech), that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“father of a king”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“father of Moloch,”</span> that is, of Melcarth. A letter of his to the king of Egypt is preserved in the Tel-el-Amarna correspondence. See R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span>, p. 237. As to a title which implies that the bearer of it was the father of a god, see below, pp. 51 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_40" id="note_40" name="note_40">40.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Renan, quoted by Ch. Vellay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le culte et les fêtes d'Adonis-Thammouz</span></span>, p. 39. Mr. Cooke reads ארםלך (Uri-milk) instead of אדםלך (Adon-milk) (G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 3, p. 18).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_41" id="note_41" name="note_41">41.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Judges i. 4-7; Joshua x. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_42" id="note_42" name="note_42">42.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Genesis xiv. 18-20, with Prof. S. R. Driver's commentary; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.vv.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Adoni-bezek,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Adoni-zedek,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Melchizedek.”</span> It is to be observed that names compounded with Adoni- were occasionally borne by private persons. Such names are Adoni-kam (Ezra ii. 13) and Adoni-ram (1 Kings iv. 6), not to mention Adoni-jah (1 Kings i. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), who was a prince and aspired to the throne of his father David. These names are commonly interpreted as sentences expressive of the nature of the god whom the bearer of the name worshipped. See Prof. Th. Nöldeke, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Names,”</span> iii. 3286. It is quite possible that names which once implied divinity were afterwards degraded by application to common men.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_43" id="note_43" name="note_43">43.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel viii. 14.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_44" id="note_44" name="note_44">44.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">They were banished from the temple by King Josiah, who came to the throne in 637 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> Jerusalem fell just fifty-one years later. See 2 Kings xxiii. 7. As to these <span class="tei tei-q">“sacred men”</span> (<i xml:lang="he">ḳedēshīm</i>), see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg072">72</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_45" id="note_45" name="note_45">45.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xxiii. 7, where, following the Septuagint, we must apparently read כתנים for the בתים of the Massoretic Text. So R. Kittel and J. Skinner.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_46" id="note_46" name="note_46">46.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The <i xml:lang="he">ashērah</i> (singular of <i xml:lang="he">ashērīm</i>) was certainly of wood (Judges vi. 26): it seems to have been a tree stripped of its branches and planted in the ground beside an altar, whether of Jehovah or of other gods (Deuteronomy xvi. 21; Jeremiah xvii. 2). That the <i xml:lang="he">asherah</i> was regarded as a goddess, the female partner of Baal, appears from 1 Kings xviii. 19; 2 Kings xxi. 3, xxiii. 4; and that this goddess was identified with Ashtoreth (Astarte) may be inferred from a comparison of Judges ii. 13 with Judges iii. 7. Yet on the other hand the pole or tree seems by others to have been viewed as a male power (Jeremiah ii. 27; see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg107">107</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), and the identification of the <i xml:lang="he">asherah</i> with Astarte has been doubted or disputed by some eminent modern scholars. See on this subject W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. R. Driver, on Deuteronomy xvi. 21; J. Skinner, on 1 Kings xiv. 23; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les religions Sémitiques</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 173 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. F. Moore, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, vol. i. 330 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Asherah.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_47" id="note_47" name="note_47">47.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Deuteronomy xxiii. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (in Hebrew 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). The code of Deuteronomy was published in 621 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> in the reign of King Josiah, whose reforms, including the ejection of the <i xml:lang="he">ḳedeshim</i> from the temple, were based upon it. See W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Old Testament in the Jewish Church</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1892), pp. 256 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 353 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. R. Driver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Critical and Exegetical Commentary on Deuteronomy</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1902), pp. xliv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. Budde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der althebräischen Litteratur</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_48" id="note_48" name="note_48">48.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">He reigned seven years in Hebron and thirty-three in Jerusalem (2 Samuel v. 5; 1 Kings ii. 11; 1 Chronicles xxix. 27).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_49" id="note_49" name="note_49">49.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Professor A. H. Sayce has argued that David's original name was Elhanan (2 Samuel xxi. 19 compared with xxiii. 24), and that the name David, which he took at a later time, should be written Dod or Dodo, <span class="tei tei-q">“the Beloved One,”</span> which according to Prof. Sayce was a name for Tammuz (Adonis) in Southern Canaan, and was in particular bestowed by the Jebusites of Jerusalem on their supreme deity. See A. H. Sayce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lectures on the Religion of the Ancient Babylonians</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1887), pp. 52-57. If he is right, his conclusions would accord perfectly with those which I had reached independently, and it would become probable that David only assumed the name of David (Dod, Dodo) after the conquest of Jerusalem, and for the purpose of identifying himself with the god of the city, who had borne the same title from time immemorial. But on the whole it seems more likely, as Professor Kennett points out to me, that in the original story Elhanah, a totally different person from David, was the slayer of Goliath, and that the part of the giant-killer was thrust on David at a later time when the brightness of his fame had eclipsed that of many lesser heroes.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_50" id="note_50" name="note_50">50.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Samuel xii. 26-31; 1 Chronicles xx. 1-3. Critics seem generally to agree that in these passages the word מלכם must be pointed <i xml:lang="he">Milcom</i>, not <i xml:lang="he">malcham</i> <span class="tei tei-q">“their king,”</span> as the Massoretic text, followed by the English version, has it. The reading <i xml:lang="he">Milcom</i>, which involves no change of the original Hebrew text, is supported by the reading of the Septuagint Μολχὸμ τοῦ βασιλέως αὐτῶν, where the three last words are probably a gloss on Μολχὸμ. See S. R. Driver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes on the Hebrew Text and the Topography of the Books of Samuel</span></span>, Second Edition (Oxford, 1913), p. 294; Dean Kirkpatrick, in his note on 2 Samuel xii. 30 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cambridge Bible for Schools and Colleges</span></span>); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, iii. 3085; R. Kittel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Biblia Hebraica</span></span>, i. 433; Brown, Driver, and Briggs, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament</span></span> (Oxford, 1906), pp. 575 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> David's son and successor adopted the worship of Milcom and made a high place for him outside Jerusalem. See 1 Kings xi. 5; 2 Kings xxiii. 13.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_51" id="note_51" name="note_51">51.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Samuel v. 6-10; 1 Chronicles xi. 4-9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_52" id="note_52" name="note_52">52.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See for example 1 Samuel xxiv. 8; 2 Samuel xiv. 9, 12, 15, 17, 18, 19, 22, xv. 15, 21, xvi. 4, 9, xviii. 28, 31, 32; 1 Kings i. 2, 13, 18, 20, 21, 24, 27; 1 Chronicles xxi. 3, 23.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_53" id="note_53" name="note_53">53.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jeremiah xxii. 18, xxxiv. 5. In the former passage, according to the Massoretic text, the full formula of mourning was, <span class="tei tei-q">“Alas my brother! alas sister! alas lord! alas his glory!”</span> Who was the lamented sister? Professor T. K. Cheyne supposes that she was Astarte, and by a very slight change (דדה for הדה) he would read <span class="tei tei-q">“Dodah”</span> for <span class="tei tei-q">“his glory,”</span> thus restoring the balance between the clauses; for <span class="tei tei-q">“Dodah”</span> would then answer to <span class="tei tei-q">“Adon”</span> (lord) as <span class="tei tei-q">“sister”</span> answers to <span class="tei tei-q">“brother.”</span> I have to thank Professor Cheyne for kindly communicating this conjecture to me by letter. He writes that Dodah <span class="tei tei-q">“is a title of Ishtar, just as Dôd is a title of Tamûz,”</span> and for evidence he refers me to the Dodah of the Moabite Stone, where, however, the reading Dodah is not free from doubt. See G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 1, pp. 1, 3, 11; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, ii. 3045; S. R. Driver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes on the Hebrew Text and the Topography of the Books of Samuel</span></span>, Second Edition (Oxford, 1913), pp. lxxxv., lxxxvi., xc.; F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span> (Berlin, 1888), p. 234; H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte Israels</span></span> (Leipsic, 1895-1900), ii. 258. As to Hebrew names formed from the root <i xml:lang="he">dôd</i> in the sense of <span class="tei tei-q">“beloved,”</span> see Brown, Driver, and Briggs, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hebrew and English Lexicon of the Old Testament</span></span>, pp. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. B. Gray, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studies in Hebrew Proper Names</span></span> (London, 1896), pp. 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_54" id="note_54" name="note_54">54.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This was perceived by Renan (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire du peuple d'Israel</span></span>, iii. 273), and Prof. T. K. Cheyne writes to me: <span class="tei tei-q">“The formulae of public mourning were derived from the ceremonies of the Adonia; this Lenormant saw long ago.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_55" id="note_55" name="note_55">55.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Chronicles xxix. 23; 2 Chronicles ix. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_56" id="note_56" name="note_56">56.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel xvi. 13, 14, compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, x. 1 and 20. The oil was poured on the king's head (1 Samuel x. 1; 2 Kings ix. 3, 6). For the conveyance of the divine spirit by means of oil, see also Isaiah lx. 1. The kings of Egypt appear to have consecrated their vassal Syrian kings by pouring oil on their heads. See the Tell-el-Amarna letters, No. 37 (H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Thontafeln von Tell-el-Amarna</span></span>, p. 99). Some West African priests are consecrated by a similar ceremony. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg068">68</a>. The natives of Buru, an East Indian island, imagine that they can keep off demons by smearing their bodies with coco-nut oil, but the oil must be prepared by young unmarried girls. See G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“Bijdrage tot de kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland Boeroe,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</span></span>, xxxviii. (Batavia, 1875) p. 30; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), i. 61. In some tribes of North-West America hunters habitually anointed their hair with decoctions of certain plants and deer's brains before they set out to hunt. The practice was probably a charm to secure success in the hunt. See C. Hill-Tout, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Home of the Salish and Déné</span></span> (London, 1907), p. 72.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_57" id="note_57" name="note_57">57.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel xxiv. 6. Messiah in Hebrew is <i xml:lang="he">Mashiah</i> (משיה). The English form Messiah is derived from the Aramaic through the Greek. See T. K. Cheyne, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Messiah,”</span> vol. iii. 3057 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Why hair oil should be considered a vehicle of inspiration is by no means clear. It would have been intelligible if the olive had been with the Hebrews, as it was with the Athenians, a sacred tree under the immediate protection of a deity; for then a portion of the divine essence might be thought to reside in the oil. W. Robertson Smith supposed that the unction was originally performed with the fat of a sacrificial victim, for which vegetable oil was a later substitute (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 383 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). On the whole subject see J. Wellhausen, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zwei Rechtsriten bei den Hebräern,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, vii. (1904) pp. 33-39; H. Weinel, <span class="tei tei-q">“משה und seine Derivate,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für die alttestamentliche Wissenschaft</span></span>, xviii. (1898) pp. 1-82.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_58" id="note_58" name="note_58">58.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Samuel xxi. 1-14, with Dean Kirkpatrick's notes on 1 and 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_59" id="note_59" name="note_59">59.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 284 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_60" id="note_60" name="note_60">60.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel xii. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Similarly, Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven and the Lord sent thunder and rain (Exodus ix. 23). The word for thunder in both these passages is <span class="tei tei-q">“voices”</span> (קלות). The Hebrews heard in the clap of thunder the voice of Jehovah, just as the Greeks heard in it the voice of Zeus and the Romans the voice of Jupiter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_61" id="note_61" name="note_61">61.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel xiii. 11, 13, xxxviii. 22; Jeremiah iii. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The Hebrews looked to Jehovah for rain (Leviticus xxvi. 3-5; Jeremiah v. 24) just as the Greeks looked to Zeus and the Romans to Jupiter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_62" id="note_62" name="note_62">62.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezra x. 9-14. The special sin which they laid to heart on this occasion was their marriage with Gentile women. It is implied, though not expressly said, that they traced the inclemency of the weather to these unfortunate alliances. Similarly, <span class="tei tei-q">“during the rainy season, when the sun is hidden behind great masses of dark clouds, the Indians set up a wailing for their sins, believing that the sun is angry and may never shine on them again.”</span> See Francis C. Nicholas, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Aborigines of Santa Maria, Colombia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Anthropologist</span></span>, N.S., iii. (New York, 1901) p. 641. The Indians in question are the Aurohuacas of Colombia, in South America.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_63" id="note_63" name="note_63">63.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Psalm cxxxvii. The willows beside the rivers of Babylon are mentioned in the laments for Tammuz. See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg009">9</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg010">10</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_64" id="note_64" name="note_64">64.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The line of the Dead Sea, lying in its deep trough, is visible from the Mount of Olives; indeed, so clear is the atmosphere that the blue water seems quite near the eye, though in fact it is more than fifteen miles off and nearly four thousand feet below the spectator. See K. Baedeker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Palestine and Syria</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), p. 77. When the sun shines on it, the lake is of a brilliant blue (G. A. Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical Geography of the Holy Land</span></span>, London, 1894, pp. 501 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>); but its brilliancy is naturally dimmed under clouded skies.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_65" id="note_65" name="note_65">65.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings v. 5-7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_66" id="note_66" name="note_66">66.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Samuel xxiv.; 1 Chronicles xxi. In this passage, contrary to his usual practice, the Chronicler has enlivened the dull tenor of his history with some picturesque touches which we miss in the corresponding passage of Kings. It is to him that we owe the vision of the Angel of the Plague first stretching out his sword over Jerusalem and then returning it to the scabbard. From him Defoe seems to have taken a hint in his account of the prodigies, real or imaginary, which heralded the outbreak of the Great Plague in London. <span class="tei tei-q">“One time before the plague was begun, otherwise than as I have said in St. Giles's, I think it was in March, seeing a crowd of people in the street, I joined with them to satisfy my curiosity, and found them all staring up into the air to see what a woman told them appeared plain to her, which was an angel clothed in white with a fiery sword in his hand, waving it or brandishing it over his head.... One saw one thing and one another. I looked as earnestly as the rest, but, perhaps, not with so much willingness to be imposed upon; and I said, indeed, that I could see nothing but a white cloud, bright on one side, by the shining of the sun upon the other part.”</span> See Daniel Defoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of the Plague in London</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1810, pp. 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). It is the more likely that Defoe had here the Chronicler in mind, because a few pages earlier he introduces the prophet Jonah and a man out of Josephus with very good effect.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_67" id="note_67" name="note_67">67.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xvii. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, xviii. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_68" id="note_68" name="note_68">68.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xix. 32-36.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_69" id="note_69" name="note_69">69.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">We owe to Ezekiel (xxiii. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 12) the picture of the handsome Assyrian cavalrymen in their blue uniforms and gorgeous trappings. The prophet writes as if in his exile by the waters of Babylon he had seen the blue regiments filing past, in all the pomp of war, on their way to the front.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_70" id="note_70" name="note_70">70.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Samaria fell in 722 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, during or just before the reign of Hezekiah: the Book of Deuteronomy, the cornerstone of king Josiah's reformation, was produced in 621 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>; and Jerusalem fell in 586 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> The date of Hezekiah's accession is a much-disputed point in the chronology of Judah. See the Introduction to Kings and Isaiah i.-xxxix. by J. Skinner and O. C. Whitehouse respectively, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Century Bible</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_71" id="note_71" name="note_71">71.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Or the Deuteronomic redactor, as the critics call him. See W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Old Testament in the Jewish Church</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1892), pp. 395 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 425; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, ii. 2078 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 2633 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, iv. 4273 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. Budde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der althebräischen Litteratur</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 99, 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 127 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 132; Principal J. Skinner, in his introduction to Kings (in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Century Bible</span></span>), pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_72" id="note_72" name="note_72">72.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Menander of Ephesus, quoted by Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Apionem</span></span>, i. 18 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iv. 446); G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 4, p. 26. According to Justin, however, the priest of Hercules, that is, of Melcarth, at Tyre, was distinct from the king and second to him in dignity. See Justin, xviii. 4, 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_73" id="note_73" name="note_73">73.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hosea ii. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1894), pp. 95-107.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_74" id="note_74" name="note_74">74.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 107 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_75" id="note_75" name="note_75">75.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 120 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 376 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_76" id="note_76" name="note_76">76.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xvi. 1. 18, p. 755.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_77" id="note_77" name="note_77">77.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_78" id="note_78" name="note_78">78.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vita Constantini</span></span>, iii. 55; Sozomenus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, ii. 5; Socrates, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, i. 18; Zosimus, i. 58.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_79" id="note_79" name="note_79">79.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the valley of the Nahr Ibrahim, its scenery and monuments, see Edward Robinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Biblical Researches in Palestine</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1867), iii. 603-609; W. M. Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land and the Book, Lebanon, Damascus, and beyond Jordan</span></span> (London, 1886), pp. 239-246; E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span>, pp. 282 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1897) pp. 175-179; Sir Charles Wilson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Picturesque Palestine</span></span> (London, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), iii. 16, 17, 27. Among the trees which line the valley are oak, sycamore, bay, plane, orange, and mulberry (W. M. Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 245). Travellers are unanimous in testifying to the extraordinary beauty of the vale of the Adonis. Thus Robinson writes: <span class="tei tei-q">“There is no spot in all my wanderings on which memory lingers with greater delight than on the sequestered retreat and exceeding loveliness of Afka.”</span> Renan says that the landscape is one of the most beautiful in the world. My friend the late Sir Francis Galton wrote to me (20th September 1906): <span class="tei tei-q">“I have no good map of Palestine, but strongly suspect that my wanderings there, quite sixty years ago, took me to the place you mention, above the gorge of the river Adonis. Be that as it may, I have constantly asserted that the view I then had of a deep ravine and blue sea seen through the cliffs that bounded it, was the most beautiful I had ever set eyes on.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_80" id="note_80" name="note_80">80.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymologicum Magnum</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἄφακα, p. 175.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_81" id="note_81" name="note_81">81.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Melito, <span class="tei tei-q">“Oration to Antoninus Caesar,”</span> in W. Cureton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spicilegium Syriacum</span></span> (London, 1855), p. 44.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_82" id="note_82" name="note_82">82.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span>, pp. 292-294. The writer seems to have no doubt that the beast attacking Adonis is a bear, not a boar. Views of the monument are given by A. Jeremias, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Alte Testament im Lichte des Alten Orients</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), p. 90, and by Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, plates i. and ii., with his discussion, pp. 78 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_83" id="note_83" name="note_83">83.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn</span></span>, i. 21. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_84" id="note_84" name="note_84">84.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_85" id="note_85" name="note_85">85.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, ii. 2, p. 224; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. 199; G. A. Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical Geography of the Holy Land</span></span> (London, 1894), p. 135.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_86" id="note_86" name="note_86">86.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the natural wealth of Cyprus see Strabo, xiv. 6. 5; W. H. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span>, i. 40-71; F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, ii. 2, pp. 224 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. 200 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Oberhummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Insel Cypern</span></span>, i. (Munich, 1903) pp. 175 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 243 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the firs and cedars of Cyprus see Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Plantarum</span></span>, v. 7. 1, v. 9. 1. The Cyprians boasted that they could build and rig a ship complete, from her keel to her topsails, with the native products of their island (Ammianus Marcellinus, xiv. 8. 14).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_87" id="note_87" name="note_87">87.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-Book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, Nos. 12-25, pp. 55-76, 347-349; P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">New Chapters in Greek History</span></span> (London, 1892), pp. 179, 185. It has been held that the name of Citium is etymologically identical with Hittite. If that was so, it would seem that the town was built and inhabited by a non-Semitic people before the arrival of the Phoenicians. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kittim.”</span> Other traces of this older race, akin to the primitive stock of Asia Minor, have been detected in Cyprus; amongst them the most obvious is the Cyprian syllabary, the characters of which are neither Phoenician nor Greek in origin. See P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 154, 173-175, 178 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_88" id="note_88" name="note_88">88.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-Book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 11, p. 52.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_89" id="note_89" name="note_89">89.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἀμαθοῦς; Pausanias, ix. 41. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to Pausanias, there was a remarkable necklace of green stones and gold in the sanctuary of Adonis and Aphrodite at Amathus. The Greeks commonly identified it with the necklace of Harmonia or Eriphyle. A terra-cotta statuette of Astarte, found at Amathus (?), represents her wearing a necklace which she touches with one hand. See L. P. di Cesnola, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cyprus</span></span> (London, 1877), p. 275. The scanty ruins of Amathus occupy an isolated hill beside the sea. Among them is an enormous stone jar, half buried in the earth, of which the four handles are adorned with figures of bulls. It is probably of Phoenician manufacture. See L. Ross, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen nach Kos, Halikarnassos, Rhodes und der Insel Cypern</span></span> (Halle, 1852), pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_90" id="note_90" name="note_90">90.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἀμαθοῦς. For the relation of Adonis to Osiris at Byblus see below, vol. ii. pp. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 127.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_91" id="note_91" name="note_91">91.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Μάλικα.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_92" id="note_92" name="note_92">92.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. P. di Cesnola, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cyprus</span></span>, pp. 254-283; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iii. (Paris, 1885) pp. 216-222.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_93" id="note_93" name="note_93">93.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. G. Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Devia Cypria</span></span> (London, 1889), pp. 1-3; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">9</span></span> vi. 747; Élisée Reclus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</span></span> (Paris, 1879-1894), ix. 668.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_94" id="note_94" name="note_94">94.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. L. Donaldson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Architectura Numismatica</span></span> (London, 1859), pp. 107-109, with fig. 31; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 210-213; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Cyprus</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. cxxvii-cxxxiv, with plates xiv. 2, 3, 6-8, xv. 1-4, 7, xvi. 2, 4, 6-9, xvii. 4-6, 8, 9, xxvi. 3, 6-16; George Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins in the Hunterian Collection</span></span> (Glasgow, 1899-1905), ii. 566, with pl. lxi. 19. As to the existing remains of the temple, which were excavated by an English expedition in 1887-1888, see <span class="tei tei-q">“Excavations in Cyprus, 1887-1888,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 193 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Previous accounts of the temple are inaccurate and untrustworthy.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_95" id="note_95" name="note_95">95.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Schuchhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schliemann's Ausgrabungen</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1891), pp. 231-233; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, vi. (Paris, 1894) pp. 336 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 652-654; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">New Chapters in Greek History</span></span>, p. 181.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_96" id="note_96" name="note_96">96.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Selden, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dis Syris</span></span> (Leipsic, 1668), pp. 274 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. Bochart, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hierozoicon</span></span>, Editio Tertia (Leyden, 1692), ii. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare the statue of a priest with a dove in his hand, which was found in Cyprus (Perrot et Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iii. Paris, 1885, p. 510), with fig. 349.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_97" id="note_97" name="note_97">97.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. J. Evans, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xxi. (1901) pp. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_98" id="note_98" name="note_98">98.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals</span></span>, iii. 62.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_99" id="note_99" name="note_99">99.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 105; compare Pausanias, i. 14. 7. Herodotus only speaks of the sanctuary of Aphrodite in Cyprus, but he must refer to the great one at Paphos. At Ascalon a goddess was worshipped in mermaid-shape under the name of Derceto, and fish and doves were sacred to her (Diodorus Siculus, ii. 4; compare Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 14). The name Derceto, like the much more correct Atargatis, is a Greek corruption of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">'Attâr</span></span>, the Aramaic form of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Astarte</span></span>, but the two goddesses Atargatis and Astarte, in spite of the affinity of their names, appear to have been historically distinct. See Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2 (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1909), pp. 605, 650 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span> (Berlin, 1888), pp. 68 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.vv.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Atargatis”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“Dea Syria,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>; René Dussaud, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes de Mythologie Syrienne</span></span> (Paris, 1903), pp. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; R. A. Stewart Macalister, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Philistines, their History and Civilization</span></span> (London, 1913), pp. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_100" id="note_100" name="note_100">100.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It is described by ancient writers and figured on coins. See Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist.</span></span> ii. 3; Maximus Tyrius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dissert.</span></span> viii. 8; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> i. 720; T. L. Donaldson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Architectura Numismatica</span></span>, p. 107, with fig. 31; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 210-212. According to Maximus Tyrius, the material of the pyramid was unknown. Probably it was a stone. The English archaeologists found several fragments of white cones on the site of the temple at Paphos: one which still remains in its original position in the central chamber was of limestone and of somewhat larger size (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) p. 180).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_101" id="note_101" name="note_101">101.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg014">14</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_102" id="note_102" name="note_102">102.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On coins of Perga the sacred cone is represented as richly decorated and standing in a temple between sphinxes. See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 585; P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Types of Greek Coins</span></span> (Cambridge, 1883), pl. xv. No. 3; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycia, Pamphylia, and Pisidia</span></span> (London, 1897), pl. xxiv. 12, 15, 16. However, Mr. G. F. Hill writes to me: <span class="tei tei-q">“Is the stone at Perga really a cone? I have always thought it was a cube or something of that kind. On the coins the upper, sloping portion is apparently an elaborate veil or head-dress. The head attached to the stone is seen in the middle of this, surmounted by a tall <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kalathos</span></span>.”</span> The sanctuary stood on a height, and a festival was held there annually (Strabo, xiv. 4. 2, p. 667). The native title of the goddess was <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Anassa</span></span>, that is, <span class="tei tei-q">“Queen.”</span> See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Wernicke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Artemis,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, ii. 1, col. 1397. Aphrodite at Paphos bore the same title. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg042">42</a>, note 6. The worship of Pergaean Artemis at Halicarnassus was cared for by a priestess, who held office for life and had to make intercession for the city at every new moon. See G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1898-1901), vol. ii. p. 373, No. 601.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_103" id="note_103" name="note_103">103.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodian, v. 3. 5. This cone was of black stone, with some small knobs on it, like the stone of Cybele at Pessinus. It is figured on coins of Emesa. See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 659; P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Types of Greek Coins</span></span>, pl. xv. No. 1. The sacred stone of Cybele, which the Romans brought from Pessinus to Rome during the Second Punic War, was small, black, and rugged, but we are not told that it was of conical shape. See Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, vii. 49; Livy, xxix. 11. 7. According to one reading, Servius (on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vii. 188) speaks of the stone of Cybele as a needle (<i xml:lang="la">acus</i>), which would point to a conical shape. But the reading appears to be without manuscript authority, and other emendations have been suggested.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_104" id="note_104" name="note_104">104.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iii. 273, 298 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The sanctuary of Aphrodite, or rather Astarte, at Golgi is said to have been even more ancient than her sanctuary at Paphos (Pausanias, viii. 5. 2).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_105" id="note_105" name="note_105">105.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. M. Flinders Petrie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Sinai</span></span> (London, 1906), pp. 135 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 189. Votive cones made of clay have been found in large numbers in Babylonia, particularly at Lagash and Nippur. See M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span> (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), pp. 672-674.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_106" id="note_106" name="note_106">106.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist.</span></span> ii. 3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_107" id="note_107" name="note_107">107.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">We learn this from an inscription found at Paphos. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 188, 231.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_108" id="note_108" name="note_108">108.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, x. 24. 6, with my note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_109" id="note_109" name="note_109">109.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. G. Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Wandering Scholar in the Levant</span></span> (London, 1896), pp. 179 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Women used to creep through a holed stone to obtain children at a place on the Dee in Aberdeenshire. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, ii. 187.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_110" id="note_110" name="note_110">110.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iii. 628.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_111" id="note_111" name="note_111">111.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 199; Athenaeus, xii. 11, p. 516 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>; Justin, xviii. 5. 4; Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. Inst.</span></span> i. 17; W. H. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span>, ii. 142 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Asiatic customs of this sort have been rightly explained by W. Mannhardt (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, pp. 283 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_112" id="note_112" name="note_112">112.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 199; Strabo, xvi. 1. 20, p. 745. As to the identity of Mylitta with Astarte see H. Zimmern in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 423, note 7, 428, note 4. According to him, the name Mylitta comes from <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Mu'allidtu</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“she who helps women in travail.”</span> In this character Ishtar would answer to the Greek Artemis and the Latin Diana. As to sacred prostitution in the worship of Ishtar see M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 475 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 484 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. Dhorme, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion Assyro-Babylonienne</span></span> (Paris, 1910), pp. 86, 300 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_113" id="note_113" name="note_113">113.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vita Constantini</span></span>, iii. 58; Socrates, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, i. 18. 7-9; Sozomenus, Historia Ecclesiastica, v. 10. 7. Socrates says that at Heliopolis local custom obliged the women to be held in common, so that paternity was unknown, <span class="tei tei-q">“for there was no distinction of parents and children, and the people prostituted their daughters to the strangers who visited them”</span> (τοῖς παριοῦσι ξένοις). The prostitution of matrons as well as of maids is mentioned by Eusebius. As he was born and spent his life in Syria, and was a contemporary of the practices he describes, the bishop of Caesarea had the best opportunity of informing himself as to them, and we ought not, as Prof. M. P. Nilsson does (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Feste</span></span>, Leipsic, 1906, p. 366 n.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span>), to allow his positive testimony on this point to be outweighed by the silence of the later historian Sozomenus, who wrote long after the custom had been abolished. Eusebius had good reason to know the heathenish customs which were kept up in his diocese; for he was sharply taken to task by Constantine for allowing sacrifices to be offered on altars under the sacred oak or terebinth at Mamre; and in obedience to the imperial commands he caused the altars to be destroyed and an oratory to be built instead under the tree. So in Ireland the ancient heathen sanctuaries under the sacred oaks were converted by Christian missionaries into churches and monasteries. See Socrates, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, i. 18; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 242 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_114" id="note_114" name="note_114">114.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athanasius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Oratio contra Gentes</span></span>, 26 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xxv. 52), γυναῖκες γοῦν ἐν εἰδωλείοις τῆς Φοινικῆς πάλαι προεκαθέζοντο, ἀπαρχόμεναι τοῖς ἐκεῖ θέοις ἑαυτῶν τὴν τοῦ σώματος αὐτῶν μισθαρνίαν, νομίζουσαι τῇ πορνειᾳ τὴν θέον ἑαυτῶν ἰλάσκεσθαι καὶ εἰς εὐμενείαν ἄγειν αὐτὴν διὰ τούτων. The account of the Phoenician custom which is given by H. Ploss (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Weib</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 302) and repeated after him by Fr. Schwally (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Semitische Kriegsaltertümer</span></span>, Leipsic, 1901, pp. 76 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) may rest only on a misapprehension of this passage of Athanasius. But if it is correct, we may conjecture that the slaves who deflowered the virgins were the sacred slaves of the temples, the <i xml:lang="he">ḳedeshim</i>, and that they discharged this office as the living representatives of the god. As to these <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ḳedeshim</span></span>, or <span class="tei tei-q">“sacred men,”</span> see above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg017">17</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, and below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg072">72</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_115" id="note_115" name="note_115">115.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs</span></span>, translated and edited by R. H. Charles (London, 1908), chapter xii. p. 81.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_116" id="note_116" name="note_116">116.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 6. The writer is careful to indicate that none but strangers were allowed to enjoy the women (ἡ δὲ ἀγορὴ μούνοισι ξείνοισι παρακέεται).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_117" id="note_117" name="note_117">117.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 30 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_118" id="note_118" name="note_118">118.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 93 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Athenaeus, xii. 11, pp. 515 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_119" id="note_119" name="note_119">119.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Unedited Inscriptions of Asia Minor,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de Correspondance Hellénique</span></span>, vii. (1883) p. 276; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</span></span>, i. (Oxford, 1895) pp. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 115.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_120" id="note_120" name="note_120">120.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xi. 14. 16, p. 532.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_121" id="note_121" name="note_121">121.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 3. 32, 34 and 36, pp. 557-559; compare xii. 2. 3, p. 535. Other sanctuaries in Pontus, Cappadocia, and Phrygia swarmed with sacred slaves, and we may conjecture, though we are not told, that many of these slaves were prostitutes. See Strabo, xi. 8. 4, xii. 2. 3 and 6, xii. 3. 31 and 37, xii. 8. 14.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_122" id="note_122" name="note_122">122.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On this great Asiatic goddess and her lovers see especially Sir W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</span></span>, i. 87 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_123" id="note_123" name="note_123">123.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, pp. 284 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Prophets of Israel</span></span>, New Edition (London, 1902), pp. 171-174. Similarly in Camul, formerly a province of the Chinese Empire, the men used to place their wives at the disposal of any foreigners who came to lodge with them, and deemed it an honour if the guests made use of their opportunities. The emperor, hearing of the custom, forbade the people to observe it. For three years they obeyed, then, finding that their lands were no longer fruitful and that many mishaps befell them, they prayed the emperor to allow them to retain the custom, <span class="tei tei-q">“for it was by reason of this usage that their gods bestowed upon them all the good things that they possessed, and without it they saw not how they could continue to exist.”</span> See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Book of Ser Marco Polo</span></span>, translated and edited by Colonel Henry Yule, Second Edition (London, 1875), i. 212 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Here apparently the fertility of the soil was deemed to depend on the intercourse of the women with strangers, not with their husbands. Similarly, among the Oulad Abdi, an Arab tribe of Morocco, <span class="tei tei-q">“the women often seek a divorce and engage in prostitution in the intervals between their marriages; during that time they continue to dwell in their families, and their relations regard their conduct as very natural. The administrative authority having bestirred itself and attempted to regulate this prostitution, the whole population opposed the attempt, alleging that such a measure would impair the abundance of the crops.”</span> See Edmond Doutté, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magie et Religion dans l'Afrique du Nord</span></span> (Algiers, 1908), pp. 560 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_124" id="note_124" name="note_124">124.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 14, p. 13, ed. Potter; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 19; compare Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_125" id="note_125" name="note_125">125.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In Hebrew a temple harlot was regularly called <span class="tei tei-q">“a sacred woman”</span> (<i xml:lang="he">kĕdēsha</i>). See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Harlot”</span>; S. R. Driver, on Genesis xxxviii. 21. As to such <span class="tei tei-q">“sacred women”</span> see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg070">70</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_126" id="note_126" name="note_126">126.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 13, p. 12, ed. Potter; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 19; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_127" id="note_127" name="note_127">127.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 14. 3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_128" id="note_128" name="note_128">128.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 14. 3. I follow the text of R. Wagner's edition in reading Μεγασσάρου τοῦ Ὑριέων βασιλέως. As to Hyria in Isauria see Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ὑρία. The city of Celenderis, on the south coast of Cilicia, possessed a small harbour protected by a fortified peninsula. Many ancient tombs survived till recent times, but have now mostly disappeared. It was the port from which the Turkish couriers from Constantinople used to embark for Cyprus. As to the situation and remains see F. Beaufort, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Karmania</span></span> (London, 1817), p. 201; W. M. Leake, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of a Tour in Asia Minor</span></span> (London, 1824), pp. 114-118; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosoph.-historische Classe</span></span>, xliv. (1896) No. vi. p. 94. The statement that the sanctuary of Aphrodite at Paphos was founded by the Arcadian Agapenor, who planted a colony in Cyprus after the Trojan war (Pausanias, viii. 5. 2), may safely be disregarded.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_129" id="note_129" name="note_129">129.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist.</span></span> ii. 3; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals</span></span>, iii. 62.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_130" id="note_130" name="note_130">130.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist.</span></span> ii. 3; Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ταμιράδαι.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_131" id="note_131" name="note_131">131.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> ii. 13-17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_132" id="note_132" name="note_132">132.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tyrtaeus, xii. 6 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Poetae Lyrici Graeci</span></span>, ed. Th. Bergk,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> Leipsic, 1866-1867, ii. 404); Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> viii. 18; Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Laws</span></span>, ii. 6, p. 660 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">e</span></span>; Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Paedag.</span></span> iii. 6, p. 274, ed. Potter; Dio Chrysostom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orat.</span></span> viii. (vol. i. p. 149, ed. L. Dindorf); Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist.</span></span> lix. p. 574, ed. F. C. Hertlein; Diogenianus, viii. 53; Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Καταγηράσαις.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_133" id="note_133" name="note_133">133.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> ii. 15 (27); Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Κινυράδαι; Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> iii. 45, p. 40, ed. Potter; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, vi. 6. That the kings of Paphos were also priests of the goddess is proved, apart from the testimony of ancient writers, by inscriptions found on the spot. See H. Collitz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sammlung der griechischen Dialektinschriften</span></span>, i. (Göttingen, 1884) p. 22, Nos. 38, 39, 40. The title of the goddess in these inscriptions is Queen or Mistress (Ϝανασ(σ)ἀς). It is perhaps a translation of the Semitic Baalath.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_134" id="note_134" name="note_134">134.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Alexandri Magni fortuna aut virtute</span></span>, ii. 8. The name of the gardener-king was Alynomus. That the Cinyrads existed as a family down to Macedonian times is further proved by a Greek inscription found at Old Paphos, which records that a certain Democrates, son of Ptolemy, head of the Cinyrads, and his wife Eunice, dedicated a statue of their daughter to the Paphian Aphrodite. See L. Ross, <span class="tei tei-q">“Inschriften von Cypern,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rheinisches Museum</span></span>, N.F. vii. (1850) pp. 520 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It seems to have been a common practice of parents to dedicate statues of their sons or daughters to the goddess at Paphos. The inscribed pedestals of many such statues were found by the English archaeologists. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 228, 235, 236, 237, 241, 244, 246, 255.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_135" id="note_135" name="note_135">135.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist.</span></span> ii. 4; Pausanias, viii. 24. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_136" id="note_136" name="note_136">136.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cato the Younger</span></span>, 35.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_137" id="note_137" name="note_137">137.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 298 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 58, 64; Fulgentius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mytholog.</span></span> iii. 8; Lactantius Placidius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrat. Fabul.</span></span> x. 9; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ecl.</span></span> x. 18, and <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> v. 72; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Parallela</span></span>, 22; Schol. on Theocritus, i. 107. It is Ovid who describes (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 431 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) the festival of Ceres, at which the incest was committed. His source was probably the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metamorphoses</span></span> of the Greek writer Theodorus, which Plutarch (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) refers to as his authority for the story. The festival in question was perhaps the Thesmophoria, at which women were bound to remain chaste (Schol. on Theocritus, iv. 25; Schol. on Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ther.</span></span> 70 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxiv. 59; Dioscorides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Materia Medica</span></span>, i. 134 (135); compare Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura animalium</span></span>, ix. 26). Compare E. Fehrle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die kultische Keuschheit im Altertum</span></span> (Giessen, 1910), pp. 103 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 121 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 151 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The corn and bread of Cyprus were famous in antiquity. See Aeschylus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Suppliants</span></span>, 549 (555); Hipponax, cited by Strabo, viii. 3. 8, p. 340; Eubulus, cited by Athenaeus, iii. 78, p. 112 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">f</span></span>; E. Oberhummer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Insel. Cypern</span></span>, i. (Munich, 1903) pp. 274 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> According to another account, Adonis was the fruit of the incestuous intercourse of Theias, a Syrian king, with his daughter Myrrha. See Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 14. 4 (who cites Panyasis as his authority); J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 829; Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> 34 (who lays the scene of the story on Mount Lebanon). With the corn-wreaths mentioned in the text we may compare the wreaths which the Roman Arval Brethren wore at their sacred functions, and with which they seem to have crowned the images of the goddesses. See G. Henzen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Acta Fratrum Arvalium</span></span> (Berlin, 1874), pp. 24-27, 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Pausanias, vii. 20. 1. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_138" id="note_138" name="note_138">138.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A list of these cases is given by Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 253. It includes the incest of Clymenus, king of Arcadia, with his daughter Harpalyce (compare Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 206); that of Oenomaus, king of Pisa, with his daughter Hippodamia (compare J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 156; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Charidemus</span></span>, 19); that of Erechtheus, king of Athens, with his daughter Procris; and that of Epopeus, king of Lesbos, with his daughter Nyctimene (compare Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 204).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_139" id="note_139" name="note_139">139.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The custom of brother and sister marriage seems to have been especially common in royal families. See my note on Pausanias, i. 7. 1 (vol. ii. pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>); as to the case of Egypt see below, vol. ii. pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The true explanation of the custom was first, so far as I know, indicated by J. F. McLennan (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Patriarchal Theory</span></span>, London, 1885, p. 95).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_140" id="note_140" name="note_140">140.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aulus Gellius, x. 15. 22; J. Marquardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Staatsverwaltung</span></span>, iii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1885) p. 328.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_141" id="note_141" name="note_141">141.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Priestesses are said to have preceded priests in some Egyptian cities. See W. M. Flinders Petrie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Ancient Egypt</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 74.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_142" id="note_142" name="note_142">142.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 179, 190 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_143" id="note_143" name="note_143">143.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_144" id="note_144" name="note_144">144.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 12 note 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_145" id="note_145" name="note_145">145.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Khasis</span></span> (London, 1907), pp. 109-112, 120 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_146" id="note_146" name="note_146">146.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_147" id="note_147" name="note_147">147.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 148.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_148" id="note_148" name="note_148">148.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The late Rev. P. Dehon, S.J., <span class="tei tei-q">“Religion and Customs of the Uraons,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span>, vol. i. No. 9 (Calcutta, 1906), pp. 144-146.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_149" id="note_149" name="note_149">149.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For more evidence see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 97 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_150" id="note_150" name="note_150">150.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rhetorum praeceptor</span></span>, 11; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 270.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_151" id="note_151" name="note_151">151.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 33, p. 29, ed. Potter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_152" id="note_152" name="note_152">152.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span>, ii. 585, 612; A. Maury, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des Religions de la Grèce Antique</span></span> (Paris, 1857-1859), iii. 197, note 3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_153" id="note_153" name="note_153">153.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, vi. 22; Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> iv. 57, p. 51, ed. Potter; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 243-297. The authority for the story is the Greek history of Cyprus by Philostephanus, cited both by Arnobius and Clement. In Ovid's poetical version of the legend Pygmalion is a sculptor, and the image with which he falls in love is that of a lovely woman, which at his prayer Venus endows with life. That King Pygmalion was a Phoenician is mentioned by Porphyry (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De abstinentia</span></span>, iv. 15) on the authority of Asclepiades, a Cyprian.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_154" id="note_154" name="note_154">154.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg042">42</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_155" id="note_155" name="note_155">155.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probus, on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ecl.</span></span> x. 18. I owe this reference to my friend Mr. A. B. Cook.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_156" id="note_156" name="note_156">156.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In his treatise on the political institutions of Cyprus, Aristotle reported that the sons and brothers of the kings were called <span class="tei tei-q">“lords”</span> (ἄνακτες), and their sisters and wives <span class="tei tei-q">“ladies”</span> (ἄνασσαι). See Harpocration and Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἄνακτες. Compare Isocrates, ix. 72; Clearchus of Soli, quoted by Athenaeus, vi. 68, p. 256 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">A</span></span>. Now in the bilingual inscription of Idalium, which furnished the clue to the Cypriote syllabary, the Greek version gives the title Ϝάναξ as the equivalent of the Phoenician <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Adon</span></span> (אדן). See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum</span></span>, i. No. 89; G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, p. 74, note 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_157" id="note_157" name="note_157">157.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Apionem</span></span>, i. 18, ed. B. Niese; Appian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Punica</span></span>, i; Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> i. 346 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iii. 574; Justin, xviii. 4; Eustathius on Dionysius Periegetes, 195 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geographi Graeci Minores</span></span>, ed. C. Müller Paris, 1882, ii. 250 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_158" id="note_158" name="note_158">158.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pumi-yathon, son of Milk-yathon, is known from Phoenician inscriptions found at Idalium. See G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, Nos. 12 and 13, pp. 55 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 57 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Coins inscribed with the name of King Pumi-yathon are also in existence. See G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Cyprus</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. xl. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pl. iv. 20-24. He was deposed by Ptolemy (Diodorus Siculus, xix. 79. 4). Most probably he is the Pymaton of Citium who purchased the kingdom from a dissolute monarch named Pasicyprus some time before the conquests of Alexander (Athenaeus, iv. 63, p. 167). In this passage of Athenaeus the name Pymaton, which is found in the MSS. and agrees closely with the Phoenician Pumi-yathon, ought not to be changed into Pygmalion, as the latest editor (G. Kaibel) has done.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_159" id="note_159" name="note_159">159.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 55, note 1. Mr. Cooke remarks that the form of the name (פגמלין instead of פמייתן) must be due to Greek influence.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_160" id="note_160" name="note_160">160.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg041">41</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_161" id="note_161" name="note_161">161.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 13, p. 12; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 9; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_162" id="note_162" name="note_162">162.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">That the king was not necessarily succeeded by his eldest son is proved by the case of Solomon, who on his accession executed his elder brother Adoni-jah (1 Kings ii. 22-24). Similarly, when Abimelech became king of Shechem, he put his seventy brothers in ruthless oriental fashion to death. See Judges viii. 29-31, ix. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 18. So on his accession Jehoram, King of Judah, put all his brothers to the sword (2 Chronicles xxi. 4). King Rehoboam had eighty-eight children (2 Chronicles xi. 21) and King Abi-jah had thirty-eight (2 Chronicles xiii. 21). These examples illustrate the possible size of the family of a polygamous king.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_163" id="note_163" name="note_163">163.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 160 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_164" id="note_164" name="note_164">164.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The names which imply that a man was the father of a god have proved particularly puzzling to some eminent Semitic scholars. See W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 45, note 2; Th. Nöldeke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Names,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, iii. 3287 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 39 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 43 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Such names are Abi-baal (<span class="tei tei-q">“father of Baal”</span>), Abi-el (<span class="tei tei-q">“father of El”</span>), Abi-jah (<span class="tei tei-q">“father of Jehovah”</span>), and Abi-melech (<span class="tei tei-q">“father of a king”</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">“father of Moloch”</span>). On the hypothesis put forward in the text the father of a god and the son of a god stood precisely on the same footing, and the same person would often be both one and the other. Where the common practice prevailed of naming a father after his son (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 331 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), a divine king in later life might often be called <span class="tei tei-q">“father of such-and-such a god.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_165" id="note_165" name="note_165">165.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 418 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_166" id="note_166" name="note_166">166.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</span></span> (Tübingen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 113.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_167" id="note_167" name="note_167">167.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Borchardt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der ägyptische Titel <span class="tei tei-q">‘Vater des Gottes’</span> als Bezeichnung für <span class="tei tei-q">‘Vater oder Schwiegervater des Königs,’</span> ”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Berichte über die Verhandlungen der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Philolog.-histor. Klasse</span></span>, lvii. (1905) pp. 254-270.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_168" id="note_168" name="note_168">168.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 243; Stoll, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kinyras,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1191; 1 Samuel xvi. 23.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_169" id="note_169" name="note_169">169.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Chronicles xxv. 1-3; compare 2 Samuel vi. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_170" id="note_170" name="note_170">170.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Prophets of Israel</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1902), pp. 391 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire du peuple d'Israel</span></span> (Paris, 1893), ii. 280.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_171" id="note_171" name="note_171">171.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel x. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_172" id="note_172" name="note_172">172.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings iii. 4-24. And for the explanation of the supposed miracle, see W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Old Testament in the Jewish Church</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1892), pp. 146 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I have to thank Professor Kennett for the suggestion that the Moabites took the ruddy light on the water for an omen of blood rather than for actual gore.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_173" id="note_173" name="note_173">173.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel xvi. 14-23.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_174" id="note_174" name="note_174">174.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. H. Newman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sermons preached before the University of Oxford</span></span>, No. xv. pp. 346 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (third edition).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_175" id="note_175" name="note_175">175.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It would be interesting to pursue a similar line of inquiry in regard to the other arts. What was the influence of Phidias on Greek religion? How much does Catholicism owe to Fra Angelico?</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_176" id="note_176" name="note_176">176.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> ii. 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_177" id="note_177" name="note_177">177.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the lyre and the flute in Greek religion and Greek thought, see L. R. Farnell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cults of the Greek States</span></span> (Oxford, 1896-1909), iv. 243 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_178" id="note_178" name="note_178">178.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> i. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_179" id="note_179" name="note_179">179.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This seems to be the view also of Dr. Farnell, who rightly connects the musical with the prophetic side of Apollo's character (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 245).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_180" id="note_180" name="note_180">180.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 242. So in the version of the story which made Adonis the son of Theias, the father is said to have killed himself when he learned what he had done (Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> 34).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_181" id="note_181" name="note_181">181.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast and Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, xi. 20. Compare F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 243 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. H. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span>, ii. 109-116; Stoll, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kinyras,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1191.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_182" id="note_182" name="note_182">182.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Anacreon, cited by Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> vii. 154. Nonnus also refers to the long life of Cinyras (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dionys.</span></span> xxxii. 212 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_183" id="note_183" name="note_183">183.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">9</span></span> xiv. 858.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_184" id="note_184" name="note_184">184.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. R. Farnell, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sociological hypotheses concerning the position of women in ancient religion,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, vii. (1904) p. 88; M. P. Nilsson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Feste</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 366 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les religions orientales dans le paganisme Romain</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1909), pp. 361 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A different and, in my judgment, a truer view of these customs was formerly taken by Prof. Nilsson. See his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studia de Dionysiis Atticis</span></span> (Lund, 1900), pp. 119-121. For a large collection of facts bearing on this subject and a judicious discussion of them, see W. Hertz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Sage vom Giftmädchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gesammelte Abhandlungen</span></span> (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1905), pp. 195-219. My attention was drawn to this last work by Prof. G. L. Hamilton of the University of Michigan after my manuscript had been sent to the printer. With Hertz's treatment of the subject I am in general agreement, and I have derived from his learned treatise several references to authorities which I had overlooked.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_185" id="note_185" name="note_185">185.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg037">37</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_186" id="note_186" name="note_186">186.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg038">38</a>. Prof. Nilsson is mistaken in affirming (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 367) that the Lydian practice was purely secular: the inscription which I have cited proves the contrary. Both he and Dr. Farnell fully recognize the religious aspect of most of these customs in antiquity, and Prof. Nilsson attempts, as it seems to me, unsuccessfully, to indicate how a practice supposed to be purely secular in origin should have come to contract a religious character.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_187" id="note_187" name="note_187">187.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg037">37</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_188" id="note_188" name="note_188">188.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg036">36</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg038">38</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_189" id="note_189" name="note_189">189.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hosea iv. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_190" id="note_190" name="note_190">190.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg037">37</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_191" id="note_191" name="note_191">191.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg017">17</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_192" id="note_192" name="note_192">192.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. di Varthema, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, 1863), pp. 141, 202-204 (Malabar); J. A. de Mandlesloe, in J. Harris's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, i. (London, 1744), p. 767 (Malabar); Richard, <span class="tei tei-q">“History of Tonquin,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, ix. 760 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Aracan); A. de Morga, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Philippine Islands, Moluccas, Siam, Cambodia, Japan, and China</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, 1868), pp. 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (the Philippines); J. Mallat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Philippines</span></span> (Paris, 1846), i. 61 (the Philippines); L. Moncelon, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletins de la Société d'Anthropologie de Paris</span></span>, 3me Série, ix. (1886) p. 368 (New Caledonia); H. Crawford Angas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</span></span>, 1898, p. 481 (Azimba, Central Africa); Sir H. H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">British Central Africa</span></span> (London, 1897), p. 410 (the Wa-Yao of Central Africa). See further, W. Hertz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Sage vom Giftmädchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gesammelte Abhandlungen</span></span>, pp. 198-204.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_193" id="note_193" name="note_193">193.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 93; Justin, xviii. 5. 4. Part of the wages thus earned was probably paid into the local temple. See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg037">37</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg038">38</a>. However, according to Strabo (xi. 14. 16, p. 532) the Armenian girls of rich families often gave their lovers more than they received from them.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_194" id="note_194" name="note_194">194.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This fatal objection to the theory under discussion has been clearly stated by W. Hertz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 217. I am glad to find myself in agreement with so judicious and learned an inquirer.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_195" id="note_195" name="note_195">195.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. di Varthema, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, 1863), p. 141; J. A. de Mandlesloe, in J. Harris's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, i. (London, 1744) p. 767; A. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-q">“New Account of the East Indies,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, viii. 374; Ch. Lassen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indische Alterthumskunde</span></span>, iv. (Leipsic, 1861), p. 408; A. de Herrera, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The General History of the Vast Continent and Islands of America</span></span>, translated by Captain J. Stevens (London, 1725-1726), iii. 310, 340; Fr. Coreal, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages aux Indes Occidentales</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1722), i. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. F. Ph. v. Martius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Ethnographie und Sprachenkunde Amerika's</span></span>, i. (Leipsic, 1867) pp. 113 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The first three of these authorities refer to Malabar; the fourth refers to Cambodia; the last three refer to the Indians of Central and South America. See further W. Hertz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Sage vom Giftmädchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gesammelte Abhandlungen</span></span>, pp. 204-207. For a criticism of the Malabar evidence see K. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jus primae noctis</span></span> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1881), pp. 312-320.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_196" id="note_196" name="note_196">196.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. Institut.</span></span> i. 20; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, iv. 7; Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, vi. 9, vii. 24; D. Barbosa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, 1866), p. 96; Sonnerat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage aux Indes Orientales et à la Chine</span></span> (Paris, 1782), i. 68; F. Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Volkskunde</span></span> (Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 396 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 511; W. Hertz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Sage vom Giftmädchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gesammelte Abhandlungen</span></span>, pp. 270-272. According to Arnobius, it was matrons, not maidens, who resorted to the image. This suggests that the custom was a charm to procure offspring.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_197" id="note_197" name="note_197">197.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Schomburgk, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</span></span>, 1879, pp. 235 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Miklucho-Maclay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> 1880, p. 89; W. E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studies among the North-West-Central Queensland Aborigines</span></span> (Brisbane and London, 1897), pp. 174 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 180; B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 92-95; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 133-136. In Australia the observance of the custom is regularly followed by the exercise of what seem to be old communal rights of the men over the women.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_198" id="note_198" name="note_198">198.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. A. Dubois, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des Peuples de l'Inde</span></span> (Paris, 1825), ii. 353 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Shortt, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bayadère or dancing-girls of Southern India,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Memoirs of the Anthropological Society of London</span></span>, iii. (1867-69) pp. 182-194; Edward Balfour, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cyclopaedia of India</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1885), i. 922 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Francis, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1901</span></span>, vol. xv., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Madras</span></span>, Part I. (Madras, 1902) pp. 151 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), pp. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The office of these sacred women has in recent years been abolished, on the ground of immorality, by the native Government of Mysore. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Homeward Mail</span></span>, 6th June 1909 (extract kindly sent me by General Begbie).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_199" id="note_199" name="note_199">199.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Edgar Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1909), iii. 37-39. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), pp. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Southern India the maternal uncle often takes a prominent part in the marriage ceremony to the exclusion of the girl's father. See, for example, E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span>, ii. 497, iv. 147. The custom is derived from the old system of mother-kin, under which a man's heirs are not his own children but his sister's children. As to this system see below, Chapter XII., <span class="tei tei-q">“Mother-kin and Mother Goddesses.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_200" id="note_200" name="note_200">200.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Balfour, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 1012.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_201" id="note_201" name="note_201">201.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Francis Buchanan, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Journey from Madras through the countries of Mysore, Canara, and Malabar,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, viii. (London, 1811), p. 749.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_202" id="note_202" name="note_202">202.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">N. Subramhanya Aiyar, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1901</span></span>, vol. xxvi., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travancore</span></span>, Part i. (Trivandrum, 1903), pp. 276 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I have to thank my friend Mr. W. Crooke for referring me to this and other passages on the sacred dancing-girls of India.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_203" id="note_203" name="note_203">203.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</span></span> (London, 1890), pp. 140 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_204" id="note_204" name="note_204">204.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 142.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_205" id="note_205" name="note_205">205.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 148 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Des Marchais, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage en Guinée et à Cayenne</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1731), ii. 144-151; P. Bouche, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Côte des Esclaves</span></span> (Paris, 1885), p. 128. The Abbé Bouche calls these women <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">danwés</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_206" id="note_206" name="note_206">206.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 60; Des Marchais, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 149 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_207" id="note_207" name="note_207">207.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Des Marchais, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage en Guinée et à Cayenne</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1731), ii. 146 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_208" id="note_208" name="note_208">208.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Bosman, <span class="tei tei-q">“Description of the Coast of Guinea,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, xvi. (London, 1814), p. 494.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_209" id="note_209" name="note_209">209.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Bosman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span> The name of Whydah is spelt by Bosman as Fida, and by Des Marchais as Juda.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_210" id="note_210" name="note_210">210.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">MS. notes, kindly sent to me by the author, Mr. A. C. Hollis, 21st May, 1908.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_211" id="note_211" name="note_211">211.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</span></span>, pp. 142-144; Le R. P. Baudin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Féticheurs ou ministres religieux des Nègres de la Guinée,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Missions Catholiques</span></span>, No. 787 (4 juillet 1884), p. 322.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_212" id="note_212" name="note_212">212.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_213" id="note_213" name="note_213">213.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Côte des Esclaves</span></span>, pp. 127 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_214" id="note_214" name="note_214">214.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 147.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_215" id="note_215" name="note_215">215.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast of West Africa</span></span> (London, 1887), pp. 120-138.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_216" id="note_216" name="note_216">216.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 121.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_217" id="note_217" name="note_217">217.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 120 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 129-138. The slaves, male and female, dedicated to a god from childhood are often mentioned by the German missionary Mr. J. Spieth in his elaborate work on the Ewe people (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Eẇe-Stämme: Material zur Kunde des Eẇe-Volkes in Deutsch-Togo</span></span>, Berlin, 1906, pp. 228, 229, 309, 450, 474, 792, 797, etc.). But his information does not illustrate the principal points to which I have called attention in the text.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_218" id="note_218" name="note_218">218.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 129-135.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_219" id="note_219" name="note_219">219.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It is not clear whether the same or a different woman slept every night in the temple.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_220" id="note_220" name="note_220">220.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Gesetze Hammurabi</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903), p. 31, § 182; C. H. W. Johns, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters</span></span> (Edinburgh, 1904), pp. 54, 55, 59, 60, 61 (§§ 137, 144, 145, 146, 178, 182, 187, 192, 193, of the Code of Hammurabi). As to these female votaries see especially C. H. W. Johns, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Code of Hammurabi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures</span></span>, xix. (January 1903) pp. 98-107. Compare S. A. Cook, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Laws of Moses and the Code of Hammurabi</span></span> (London, 1903), pp. 147-150.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_221" id="note_221" name="note_221">221.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. H. W. Johns, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Code of Hammurabi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>, where we read (p. 104) of a female votary of Shamash who had a daughter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_222" id="note_222" name="note_222">222.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Code of Hammurabi</span></span>, § 181; C. H. W. Johns, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Code of Hammurabi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 100 sq.; S. A. Cook, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 148. Dr. Johns translates the name by <span class="tei tei-q">“temple maid”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian and Assyrian Laws</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contracts, and Letters</span></span>, p. 61). He is scrupulously polite to these ladies, but I gather from him that a far less charitable view of their religious vocation is taken by Father Scheil, the first editor and translator of the code.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_223" id="note_223" name="note_223">223.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Any man proved to have pointed the finger of scorn at a votary was liable to be branded on the forehead (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Code of Hammurabi</span></span>, § 127).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_224" id="note_224" name="note_224">224.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg066">66</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg069">69</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_225" id="note_225" name="note_225">225.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 182.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_226" id="note_226" name="note_226">226.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Herodots Zweites Buch</span></span> (Leipsic, 1890), pp. 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> See further <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 130 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_227" id="note_227" name="note_227">227.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xvii. 1. 46, p. 816. The title <span class="tei tei-q">“concubines of Zeus (Ammon)”</span> is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus (i. 47).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_228" id="note_228" name="note_228">228.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, i. 47.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_229" id="note_229" name="note_229">229.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The ἱερόδουλοι, as the Greeks called them.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_230" id="note_230" name="note_230">230.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I have to thank the Rev. Professor R. H. Kennett for this important suggestion as to the true nature of the <i xml:lang="he">ḳedeshim</i>. The passages of the Bible in which mention is made of these men are Deuteronomy xxiii. 17 (in Hebrew 18); 1 Kings xiv. 24, xv. 12, xxii. 46 (in Hebrew 47); 2 Kings xxiii. 7; Job xxxvi. 14 (where <i xml:lang="he">ḳedeshim</i> is translated <span class="tei tei-q">“the unclean”</span> in the English version). The usual rendering of <i xml:lang="he">ḳedeshim</i> in the English Bible is not justified by any of these passages; but it may perhaps derive support from a reference which Eusebius makes to the profligate rites observed at Aphaca (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vita Constantini</span></span>, iii. 55; Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xx. 1120); Γύνιδες γοῦν τινες ἄνδρες οὐκ ἄνδρες, τὸ σέμνον τῆς φύσεως ἀπαρνησάμενοι, θηλείᾳ νόσῳ τὴν δαίμονα ἱλεοῦντο. But probably Eusebius is here speaking of the men who castrated themselves in honour of the goddess, and thereafter wore female attire. See Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 51; and below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg269">269</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_231" id="note_231" name="note_231">231.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xi. 4. 7, p. 503.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_232" id="note_232" name="note_232">232.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Drexler, in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Men,”</span> ii. 2687 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_233" id="note_233" name="note_233">233.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">It is true that Strabo (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) speaks of the Albanian deity as a goddess, but this may be only an accommodation to the usage of the Greek language, in which the moon is feminine.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_234" id="note_234" name="note_234">234.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Florus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epitoma</span></span>, ii. 7; Diodorus Siculus, Frag. xxxiv. 2 (vol. v. pp. 87 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ed. L. Dindorf, in the Teubner series).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_235" id="note_235" name="note_235">235.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg052">52</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_236" id="note_236" name="note_236">236.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Kings xix. 16; Isaiah lx. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_237" id="note_237" name="note_237">237.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Kings xx. 41. So in Africa <span class="tei tei-q">“priests and priestesses are readily distinguishable from the rest of the community. They wear their hair long and unkempt, while other people, except the women in the towns on the seaboard, have it cut close to the head.... Frequently both appear with white circles painted round their eyes, or with various white devices, marks, or lines painted on the face, neck, shoulders, or arms”</span> (A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</span></span>, p. 123). <span class="tei tei-q">“Besides the ordinary tribal tattoo-marks borne by all natives, the priesthood in Dahomi bear a variety of such marks, some very elaborate, and an expert can tell by the marks on a priest to what god he is vowed, and what rank he holds in the order. These hierarchical marks consist of lines, scrolls, diamonds, and other patterns, with sometimes a figure, such as that of the crocodile or chameleon. The shoulders are frequently seen covered with an infinite number of small marks like dots, set close together. All these marks are considered sacred, and the laity are forbidden to touch them”</span> (A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</span></span>, p. 146). The reason why the prophet's shoulders are especially marked is perhaps given by the statement of a Zulu that <span class="tei tei-q">“the sensitive part with a doctor [medicine-man] is his shoulders. Everything he feels is in the situation of his shoulders. That is the place where black men feel the Amatongo”</span> (ancestral spirits). See H. Callaway, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of the Amazulu</span></span>, part ii. p. 159. These African analogies suggest that the <span class="tei tei-q">“wounds between the arms”</span> (literally, <span class="tei tei-q">“between the hands”</span>) which the prophet Zechariah mentions (xiii. 6) as the badge of a Hebrew prophet were marks tattooed on his shoulders in token of his holy office. The suggestion is confirmed by the prophet's own statement (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) that he had received the wounds in the house of his lovers (בית מאהבי); for the same word lovers is repeatedly applied by the prophet Hosea to the Baalim (Hosea, ii. 5, 7, 10, 12, 13, verses 7, 9, 12, 14, 15 in Hebrew).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_238" id="note_238" name="note_238">238.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel ix. 1-20.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_239" id="note_239" name="note_239">239.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Callaway, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of the Amazulu</span></span>, part iii. pp. 300 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_240" id="note_240" name="note_240">240.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg052">52</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_241" id="note_241" name="note_241">241.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel ix. 9. In the Wiimbaio tribe of South-Eastern Australia a medicine-man used to be called <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mekigar</span></span>, from <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">meki</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">‘eye’</span> or <span class="tei tei-q">‘to see,’</span> otherwise <span class="tei tei-q">‘one who sees,’</span> that is, sees the causes of maladies in people, and who could extract them from the sufferer, usually in the form of quartz crystals”</span> (A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, London, 1904, p. 380).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_242" id="note_242" name="note_242">242.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">That the prophet's office in Canaan was developed out of the widespread respect for insanity is duly recognized by Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. p. 383.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_243" id="note_243" name="note_243">243.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Max Müller, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, 1900, No. 1, p. 17; A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eine Reise nach Phönizien im 11 Jahrhundert v. Chr.”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Āgyptische Sprache und Altertumskunde</span></span>, xxxviii. (1900) pp. 6 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les contes populaires de l'Égypte Ancienne</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 192; A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altägyptische Sagen und Märchen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Gressmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altorientalische Texte und Bilder zum Alten Testamente</span></span> (Tübingen, 1909), p. 226. Scholars differ as to whether Wen-Ammon's narrative is to be regarded as history or romance; but even if it were proved to be a fiction, we might safely assume that the incident of the prophetic frenzy at Byblus was based upon familiar facts. Prof. Wiedemann thinks that the god who inspired the page was the Egyptian Ammon, not the Phoenician Adonis, but this view seems to me less probable.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_244" id="note_244" name="note_244">244.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel ix. 6-8, 10; 1 Kings xiii. 1, 4-8, 11, etc.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_245" id="note_245" name="note_245">245.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel ii. 22. Totally different from their Asiatic namesakes were the <span class="tei tei-q">“sacred men”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“sacred women”</span> who were charged with the superintendence of the mysteries at Andania in Messenia. They were chosen by lot and held office for a year. The sacred women might be either married or single; the married women had to swear that they had been true to their husbands. See G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1898-1901), vol. ii. pp. 461 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, No. 653; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span> (Brussels, 1900), pp. 596 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, No. 694; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Leges Graecorum Sacrae</span></span>, ed. J. de Prott, L. Ziehen, Pars Altera, Fasciculus i. (Leipsic, 1906), No. 58, pp. 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_246" id="note_246" name="note_246">246.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hosea ix. 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_247" id="note_247" name="note_247">247.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jeremiah xxix. 26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_248" id="note_248" name="note_248">248.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</span></span> (Chicago, New York, Toronto, 1902), pp. 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_249" id="note_249" name="note_249">249.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 152. As to these <span class="tei tei-q">“holy men,”</span> see further C. R. Conder, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tent-work in Palestine</span></span> (London, 1878), ii. 231 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>: <span class="tei tei-q">“The most peculiar class of men in the country is that of the Derwîshes, or sacred personages, who wander from village to village, performing tricks, living on alms, and enjoying certain social and domestic privileges, which very often lead to scandalous scenes. Some of these men are mad, some are fanatics, but the majority are, I imagine, rogues. They are reverenced not only by the peasantry, but also sometimes by the governing class. I have seen the Kady of Nazareth ostentatiously preparing food for a miserable and filthy beggar, who sat in the justice-hall, and was consulted as if he had been inspired. A Derwîsh of peculiar eminence is often dressed in good clothes, with a spotless turban, and is preceded by a banner-bearer, and followed by a band, with drum, cymbal, and tambourine.... It is natural to reflect whether the social position of the Prophets among the Jews may not have resembled that of the Derwîshes.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_250" id="note_250" name="note_250">250.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_251" id="note_251" name="note_251">251.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 118, 119. In India also some Mohammedan saints are noted as givers of children. Thus at Fatepur-Sikri, near Agra, is the grave of Salim Chishti, and childless women tie rags to the delicate tracery of the tomb, <span class="tei tei-q">“thus bringing them into direct communion with the spirit of the holy man”</span> (W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natives of Northern India</span></span>, London, 1907, p. 203).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_252" id="note_252" name="note_252">252.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">1 Samuel i.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_253" id="note_253" name="note_253">253.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Genesis vi. 1-3. In this passage <span class="tei tei-q">“the sons of God (or rather of the gods)”</span> probably means, in accordance with a common Hebrew idiom, no more than <span class="tei tei-q">“the gods,”</span> just as the phrase <span class="tei tei-q">“sons of the prophets”</span> means the prophets themselves. For more examples of this idiom, see Brown, Driver, and Briggs, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hebrew and English Lexicon</span></span>, p. 121.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_254" id="note_254" name="note_254">254.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For example, all Hebrew names ending in <i xml:lang="he">-el</i> or <i xml:lang="he">-iah</i> are compounds of El or Yahwe, two names of the divinity. See G. B. Gray, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studies in Hebrew Proper Names</span></span> (London, 1896), pp. 149 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_255" id="note_255" name="note_255">255.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Brown, Driver, and Briggs, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hebrew and English Lexicon</span></span>, p. 1028. But compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, iii. 3285, iv. 4452.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_256" id="note_256" name="note_256">256.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A trace of a similar belief perhaps survives in the narratives of Genesis xxxi. and Judges xiii., where barren women are represented as conceiving children after the visit of God, or of an angel of God, in the likeness of a man.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_257" id="note_257" name="note_257">257.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Spieth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ewe-Stämme</span></span> (Berlin, 1906), pp. 446, 448-450.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_258" id="note_258" name="note_258">258.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For more instances see H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Weihnachtsfest</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Bonn, 1911), i. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_259" id="note_259" name="note_259">259.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. ii. pp. 662, 663, No. 803, lines 117 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 129 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_260" id="note_260" name="note_260">260.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ii. 10. 3 (with my note), iii. 23. 7; Livy, xi. Epitome; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxix. 72; Valerius Maximus, i. 8. 2; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> xv. 626-744; Aurelius Victor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De viris illustr.</span></span> 22; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaest. Rom.</span></span> 94.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_261" id="note_261" name="note_261">261.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Plutus</span></span>, 733; Pausanias, ii. 11. 8; Herodas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mimiambi</span></span>, iv. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. ii. p. 655, No. 802, lines 116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, p. 826, No. 1069.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_262" id="note_262" name="note_262">262.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ii. 10. 3, iv. 14. 7 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_263" id="note_263" name="note_263">263.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ii. 10. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_264" id="note_264" name="note_264">264.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ii. 11. 5-8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_265" id="note_265" name="note_265">265.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Suetonius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divus Augustus</span></span>, 94; Dio Cassius, xlv. 1. 2. Tame serpents were kept in a sacred grove of Apollo in Epirus. A virgin priestess fed them, and omens of plenty and health or the opposites were drawn from the way in which the reptiles took their food from her. See Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xi. 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_266" id="note_266" name="note_266">266.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iv. 14. 7; Livy, xxvi. 19; Aulus Gellius, vi. 1; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexander</span></span>, 2. All these cases have been already cited in this connexion by L. Deubner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De incubatione</span></span> (Leipsic, 1900), p. 33 note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_267" id="note_267" name="note_267">267.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura animalium</span></span>, vi. 17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_268" id="note_268" name="note_268">268.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. V. Nanjundayya, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ethnographical Survey of Mysore</span></span>, vi. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Komati Caste</span></span> (Bangalore, 1906), p. 29.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_269" id="note_269" name="note_269">269.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. Arbousset et F. Daumas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage d'Exploration au Nord-Est de la Colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</span></span> (Paris, 1842), p. 277; H. Callaway, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religious System of the Amazulu</span></span>, part ii. pp. 140-144, 196-200, 208-212; J. Shooter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kafirs of Natal</span></span> (London, 1857), p. 162; E. Casalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Basutos</span></span> (London, 1861), p. 246; <span class="tei tei-q">“Words about Spirits,”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">South African</span></span>) <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Journal</span></span>, ii. (1880) pp. 101-103; A. Kranz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natur- und Kulturleben der Zulus</span></span> (Wiesbaden, 1880), p. 112; F. Speckmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Hermannsburger Mission in Afrika</span></span> (Hermannsburg, 1876), pp. 165-167; Dudley Kidd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Essential Kafir</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 85-87; Henri A. Junod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Life of a South African Tribe</span></span> (Neuchatel, 1912-1913), ii. 358 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_270" id="note_270" name="note_270">270.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. A. Elmslie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among the Wild Ngoni</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_271" id="note_271" name="note_271">271.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Baumann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usambara und seine Nachbargebiete</span></span> (Berlin, 1891), pp. 141 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_272" id="note_272" name="note_272">272.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. L. Hinde and H. Hinde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Last of the Masai</span></span> (London, 1901), pp. 101 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Masai</span></span> (Oxford, 1905), pp. 307 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Sir H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Uganda Protectorate</span></span> (London, 1904), ii. 832.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_273" id="note_273" name="note_273">273.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. W. H. Beech, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Suk</span></span> (Oxford, 1911), p. 20.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_274" id="note_274" name="note_274">274.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Nandi</span></span> (Oxford, 1909), p. 90.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_275" id="note_275" name="note_275">275.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. R. Tate, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Native Law of the Southern Gikuyu of British East Africa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. xxxv. April 1910, p. 243.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_276" id="note_276" name="note_276">276.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. de Pruyssenaere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen und Forschungen im Gebiete des Weissen und Blauen Nil</span></span> (Gotha, 1877), p. 27 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermann's Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</span></span>, No. 50). Compare G. Schweinfurth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Heart of Africa</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1878), i. 55. Among the Bahima of Ankole dead chiefs turn into serpents, but dead kings into lions. See J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bahima, a Cow Tribe of Enkole in the Uganda Protectorate,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxvii. (1907), pp. 101 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Major J. A. Meldon, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Bahima of Ankole,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. xxii. (January 1907), p. 151. Major Leonard holds that the pythons worshipped in Southern Nigeria are regarded as reincarnations of the dead; but this seems very doubtful. See A. G. Leonard, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Lower Niger and its Tribes</span></span> (London, 1906), pp. 327 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Pythons are worshipped by the Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast, but apparently not from a belief that the souls of the dead are lodged in them. See A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</span></span>, pp. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_277" id="note_277" name="note_277">277.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Shaw, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Betsileo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine, Reprint of the First Four Numbers</span></span> (Antananarivo, 1885), p. 411; H. W. Little, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Madagascar, its History and People</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. van Gennep, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tabou et Totémisme à Madagascar</span></span> (Paris, 1904), pp. 272 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_278" id="note_278" name="note_278">278.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Religious Rites and Customs of the Iban or Dyaks of Sarawak,”</span> by Leo Nyuak, translated from the Dyak by the Very Rev. Edm. Dunn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, i. (1906) p. 182. As to the Sea Dyak reverence for snakes and their belief that spirits (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">antus</span></span>) are incarnate in the reptiles, see further J. Perham, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sea Dyak Religion,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, No. 10 (December, 1882), pp. 222-224; H. Ling Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</span></span> (London, 1896), i. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> But from this latter account it does not appear that the spirits (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">antus</span></span>) which possess the snakes are supposed to be those of human ancestors.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_279" id="note_279" name="note_279">279.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">George Brown, D.D., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Melanesians and Polynesians</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 238 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_280" id="note_280" name="note_280">280.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. E. Casalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Basutos</span></span> (London, 1861), p. 246. Compare A. Kranz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natur- und Kulturleben der Zulus</span></span> (Wiesbaden, 1880), p. 112.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_281" id="note_281" name="note_281">281.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Masai</span></span> (Oxford, 1905), p. 307.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_282" id="note_282" name="note_282">282.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Nandi</span></span> (Oxford, 1909), p. 90.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_283" id="note_283" name="note_283">283.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mervyn W. H. Beech, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Suk, their Language and Folklore</span></span> (Oxford, 1911), p. 20.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_284" id="note_284" name="note_284">284.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. R. Tate (District Commissioner, East Africa Protectorate), <span class="tei tei-q">“The Native Law of the Southern Gikuyu of British East Africa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. xxxv., April 1910, p. 243. See further C. W. Hobley, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Researches into Kikuyu and Kamba Religious Beliefs and Customs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xli. (1911) p. 408. According to Mr. Hobley it is only one particular sort of snake, called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">nyamuyathi</span></span>, which is thought to be the abode of a spirit and is treated with ceremonious respect by the Akikuyu. Compare P. Cayzac, <span class="tei tei-q">“La Religion des Kikuyu,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, v. (1910) p. 312; and for more evidence of milk offered to serpents as embodiments of the dead see E. de Pruyssenaere and H. W. Little, cited above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg083">83</a>, notes 1 and 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_285" id="note_285" name="note_285">285.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), pp. 320 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> My friend Mr. Roscoe tells me that serpents are revered and fed with milk by the Banyoro to the north of Uganda; but he cannot say whether the creatures are supposed to be incarnations of the dead. Some of the Gallas also regard serpents as sacred and offer milk to them, but it is not said that they believe the reptiles to embody the souls of the departed. See Rev. J. L. Krapf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels, Researches and Missionary Labours in Eastern Africa</span></span> (London, 1860), pp. 77 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The negroes of Whydah in Guinea likewise feed with milk the serpents which they worship. See Thomas Astley's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">New General Collection of Voyages and Travels</span></span>, iii. (London, 1746) p. 29.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_286" id="note_286" name="note_286">286.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Mythologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1881-1883), ii. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Munich, 1912), pp. 176 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The worship of the <i xml:lang="la">genius</i> was very popular in the Roman Empire. See J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, Première Partie, i. (Paris, 1907) pp. 439 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_287" id="note_287" name="note_287">287.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxix. 72. Compare Seneca, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Ira</span></span>, iv. 31. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_288" id="note_288" name="note_288">288.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 5. 4; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 6; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> iv. 563-603.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_289" id="note_289" name="note_289">289.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cleomenes</span></span>, 39.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_290" id="note_290" name="note_290">290.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De vita Plotini</span></span>, p. 103, Didot edition (appended to the lives of Diogenes Laertius).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_291" id="note_291" name="note_291">291.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cleomenes</span></span>, 39; Scholiast on Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Plutus</span></span>, 733.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_292" id="note_292" name="note_292">292.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, viii. 41; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Themistocles</span></span>, 10; Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lysistra</span></span>, 758 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with the Scholium; Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Imag.</span></span> ii. 17. 6. See further my note on Pausanias, i, 18, 2 (vol. ii. pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_293" id="note_293" name="note_293">293.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sophocles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Electra</span></span>, 893 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orestes</span></span>, 112 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_294" id="note_294" name="note_294">294.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen des Deutsch. Archäo log. Institutes in Athen</span></span>, iv. (1879) pl. viii. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span> pp. 135 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 162 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_295" id="note_295" name="note_295">295.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg084">84</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_296" id="note_296" name="note_296">296.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. de Pruyssenaere, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span> (above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg083">83</a>, note 1).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_297" id="note_297" name="note_297">297.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See C. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkmäler der alten Kunst</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Göttingen, 1854), pl. lxi. with the corresponding text in vol. i. (where the eccentric system of paging adopted renders references to it practically useless). In these groups the female figure is commonly, and perhaps correctly, interpreted as the Goddess of Health (Hygieia). It is to be remembered that Hygieia was deemed a daughter of the serpent-god Aesculapius (Pausanias i. 23. 4), and was constantly associated with him in ritual and art. See, for example, Pausanias, i. 40. 6, ii. 4. 5, ii. 11. 6, ii. 23. 4, ii. 27. 6, iii. 22. 13, v. 20. 3, v. 26. 2, vii. 23. 7, viii. 28. 1, viii. 31. 1, viii. 32. 4, viii. 47. 1. The snake-entwined goddess whose image was found in a prehistoric shrine at Gournia in Crete may have been a predecessor of the serpent-feeding Hygieia. See R. M. Burrows, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Discoveries in Crete</span></span> (London, 1907), pp. 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The snakes, which were the regular symbol of the Furies, may have been originally nothing but the emblems or rather embodiments of the dead; and the Furies themselves may, like Aesculapius, have been developed out of the reptiles, sloughing off their serpent skins through the anthropomorphic tendency of Greek thought.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_298" id="note_298" name="note_298">298.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholia on Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dial. Meretr.</span></span> ii. (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scholia in Lucianum</span></span>, ed. H. Rabe, Leipsic, 1906, pp. 275 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). As to the Thesmophoria, see my article, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thesmophoria,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">9</span></span> xxiii. 295 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_299" id="note_299" name="note_299">299.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. S. Gatschet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Klamath Indians of South-Western Oregon</span></span> (Washington, 1890), p. xcii.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_300" id="note_300" name="note_300">300.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Washington Matthews, <span class="tei tei-q">“Myths of Gestation and Parturition,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Anthropologist</span></span>, New Series, iv. (New York, 1902) p. 738.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_301" id="note_301" name="note_301">301.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Central Provinces, Ethnographic Survey</span></span>, iii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Draft Articles on Forest Tribes</span></span> (Allahabad, 1907), p. 23.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_302" id="note_302" name="note_302">302.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of China</span></span>, v. (Leyden, 1907) pp. 536 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_303" id="note_303" name="note_303">303.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natives of Northern India</span></span> (London, 1907), p. 232.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_304" id="note_304" name="note_304">304.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Spieth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ewe-Stämme</span></span> (Berlin, 1906), p. 796.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_305" id="note_305" name="note_305">305.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. E. Erskine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of a Cruise among the Islands of the Western Pacific</span></span> (London, 1853), pp. 245 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_306" id="note_306" name="note_306">306.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Persons initiated into the mysteries of Sabazius had a serpent drawn through the bosom of their robes, and the reptile was identified with the god (ὁ διὰ κόλπου θέος, Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 16, p. 14, ed. Potter). This may be a trace of the belief that women can be impregnated by serpents, though it does not appear that the ceremony was performed only on women.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_307" id="note_307" name="note_307">307.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg078">78</a>. Among the South Slavs women go to graves to get children. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg096">96</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_308" id="note_308" name="note_308">308.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</span></span>, pp. 115 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_309" id="note_309" name="note_309">309.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Het Animisme in den Indischen Archipel</span></span> (The Hague, 1906), P. 398.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_310" id="note_310" name="note_310">310.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relations des Jésuites</span></span>, 1636, p. 130 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858). A similar custom was practised for a similar reason by the Musquakie Indians. See Miss Mary Alicia Owen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore of the Musquakie Indians of North America</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 86. Some of the instances here given have been already cited by Mr. J. E. King, who suggests, with much probability, that the special modes of burial adopted for infants in various parts of the world may often have been intended to ensure their rebirth. See J. E. King, <span class="tei tei-q">“Infant Burial,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xvii. (1903) pp. 83 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For a large collection of evidence as to the belief in the reincarnation of the dead, see E. S. Hartland, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Paternity</span></span> (London, 1909-1910), i. 156 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_311" id="note_311" name="note_311">311.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mary H. Kingsley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in West Africa</span></span> (London, 1897), p. 478.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_312" id="note_312" name="note_312">312.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. John H. Weeks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xix. (1908) p. 422.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_313" id="note_313" name="note_313">313.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Th. Masui, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Guide de la Section de l'État Indépendant du Congo à l'Exposition de Bruxelles-Tervueren en 1897</span></span> (Brussels, 1897), pp. 113 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_314" id="note_314" name="note_314">314.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. B. Purvis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Through Uganda to Mount Elgon</span></span> (London, 1909), pp. 302 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the Bagishu or Bageshu and their practice of throwing out the dead, see Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Bageshu,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxix. (1909) pp. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_315" id="note_315" name="note_315">315.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), pp. 46 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Women adopted a like precaution at the grave of twins to prevent the ghosts of the twins from entering into them and being born again (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, pp. 124 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). The Baganda always strangled children that were born feet first and buried their bodies at cross-roads. The heaps of sticks or grass thrown on these graves by passing women and girls rose in time into mounds large enough to deflect the path and to attract the notice of travellers. See J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 126 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 289.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_316" id="note_316" name="note_316">316.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 126 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In the Senegal and Niger region of Western Africa it is said to be commonly believed by women that they can conceive without any carnal knowledge of a man. See Maurice Delafosse, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Haut-Sénégal-Niger, Le Pays, les Peuples, les Langues, l'Histoire, les Civilisations</span></span> (Paris, 1912), iii. 171.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_317" id="note_317" name="note_317">317.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span>, pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 506 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the custom of depositing the afterbirths of children at the foot of banana (plantain) trees, see J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 52, 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_318" id="note_318" name="note_318">318.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natives of Northern India</span></span> (London, 1907), p. 202. As to the Hindoo custom of burying infants but burning older persons, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Belief in Immortality and the Worship of the Dead</span></span>, i. 162 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_319" id="note_319" name="note_319">319.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1911</span></span>, vol. xiv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Punjab</span></span>, Part i., Report, by Pandit Harikishan Kaul (Lahore, 1912), p. 299.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_320" id="note_320" name="note_320">320.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. M. Gordon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Folk Tales</span></span> (London, 1908), p. 49. Other explanations of the custom are reported by the writer, but the original motive was probably a desire to secure the reincarnation of the dead child in the mother.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_321" id="note_321" name="note_321">321.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. M. Gordon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 50 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_322" id="note_322" name="note_322">322.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), p. 155; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1909), iv. 52.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_323" id="note_323" name="note_323">323.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natives of Northern India</span></span>, p. 202; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1901</span></span>, vol. xvii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Punjab</span></span>, Part i., Report, by H. A. Rose (Simla, 1902), pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_324" id="note_324" name="note_324">324.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1901</span></span>, vol. xiii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Central Provinces</span></span>, Part i., Report, by R. V. Russell (Nagpur, 1902), p. 93.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_325" id="note_325" name="note_325">325.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For stories of such virgin births see Comte H. de Charency, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le folklore dans les deux Mondes</span></span> (Paris, 1894), pp. 121-256; E. S. Hartland, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Legend of Perseus</span></span>, vol. i. (London, 1894) pp. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; and my note on Pausanias vii. 17. 11 (vol. iv. pp. 138-140). To the instances there cited by me add: A. Thevet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cosmographie Universelle</span></span> (Paris, 1575), ii. 918 [wrongly numbered 952]; K. von den Steinen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</span></span> (Berlin, 1884), pp. 370, 373; H. A. Coudreau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La France Equinoxiale</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1887) pp. 184 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relations des Jésuites</span></span>, 1637, pp. 123 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858); Franz Boas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen Küste Amerikas</span></span> (Berlin, 1895), pp. 311 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. G. Morice, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Au pays de l'Ours Noir</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1897), p. 153; A. Raffray, <span class="tei tei-q">“Voyage à la côte nord de la Nouvelle Guinée,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), VI<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">e</span></span> Série, xv. (1878) pp. 392 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. L. van der Toorn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, xxxix. (1890) p. 78; E. Aymonier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Les Tchames et leurs religions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, xxiv. (1901) pp. 215 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Khasis</span></span> (London, 1907), p. 195. In some stories the conception is brought about not by eating food but by drinking water. But the principle is the same.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_326" id="note_326" name="note_326">326.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. S. Krauss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte und Brauch der Süd-Slaven</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), p. 531.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_327" id="note_327" name="note_327">327.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Keysser, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aus dem Leben der Kaileute,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) p. 26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_328" id="note_328" name="note_328">328.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. R. Rivers, <span class="tei tei-q">“Totemism in Polynesia and Melanesia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxix. (1909) pp. 173-175. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 89 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to this Melanesian belief that animals can enter into women and be born from them as human children with animal characteristics, Dr. Rivers observes (p. 174): <span class="tei tei-q">“It was clear that this belief was not accompanied by any ignorance of the physical <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">rôle</span></span> of the human father, and that the father played the same part in conception as in cases of birth unaccompanied by an animal appearance. We found it impossible to get definitely the belief as to the nature of the influence exerted by the animal on the woman, but it must be remembered that any belief of this kind can hardly have escaped the many years of European influence and Christian teaching which the people of this group have received. It is doubtful whether even a prolonged investigation of this point could now elicit the original belief of the people about the nature of the influence.”</span> To me it seems that the belief described by Dr. Rivers in the text is incompatible with the recognition of human fatherhood as a necessary condition for the birth of children, and that though the people may now recognize that necessity, perhaps as a result of intercourse with Europeans, they certainly cannot have recognized it at the time when the belief in question originated.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_329" id="note_329" name="note_329">329.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1904), p. 330, compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> pp. xi, 145, 147-151, 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 173 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 174-176, 606; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 52, 123-125, 126, 132 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 265, 335-338.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_330" id="note_330" name="note_330">330.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 162, 330 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_331" id="note_331" name="note_331">331.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 337 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_332" id="note_332" name="note_332">332.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Baldwin Spencer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Introduction to the Study of Certain Native Tribes of the Northern Territory</span></span> (Melbourne, 1912), p. 6: <span class="tei tei-q">“The two fundamental beliefs of reincarnation and of children not being of necessity the result of sexual intercourse, are firmly held by the tribes in their normal wild state. There is no doubt whatever of this, and we now know that these two beliefs extend through all the tribes northwards to Katherine Creek and eastwards to the Gulf of Carpentaria.”</span> In a letter (dated Melbourne, July 27th, 1913) Professor Baldwin Spencer writes to me that the natives on the Alligator River in the Northern Territory <span class="tei tei-q">“have detailed traditions—as also have all the tribes—of how great ancestors wandered over the country leaving numbers of spirit children behind them who have been reincarnated time after time. They know who everyone is a reincarnation of, as the names are perpetuated.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_333" id="note_333" name="note_333">333.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Baldwin Spencer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Introduction to the Study of Certain Native Tribes of the Northern Territory</span></span> (Melbourne, 1912), pp. 41-45.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_334" id="note_334" name="note_334">334.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Walter E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Queensland Ethnography</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin</span></span> No. 5, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstition, Magic, and Medicine</span></span> (Brisbane, 1903), pp. 22, § 81.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_335" id="note_335" name="note_335">335.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Walter E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 23, § 82.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_336" id="note_336" name="note_336">336.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Walter E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 23, § 83. Mr. Roth adds, very justly: <span class="tei tei-q">“When it is remembered that as a rule in all these Northern tribes, a little girl may be given to and will live with her spouse as wife long before she reaches the stage of puberty—the relationship of which to fecundity is not recognised—the idea of conception not being necessarily due to sexual connection becomes partly intelligible.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_337" id="note_337" name="note_337">337.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Bishop of North Queensland (Dr. Frodsham) in a letter to me, dated Bishop's Lodge, Townsville, Queensland, July 9th, 1909. The Bishop's authority for the statement is the Rev. C. W. Morrison, M.A., acting head of the Yarrubah Mission. In the same letter Dr. Frodsham, speaking from personal observation, refers to <span class="tei tei-q">“the belief, practically universal among the northern tribes, that copulation is not the cause of conception.”</span> See J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beliefs and Customs of the Australian Aborigines,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xx. (1909) pp. 350-352; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Man</span></span>, ix. (1909) pp. 145-147; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 577 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_338" id="note_338" name="note_338">338.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herbert Basedow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropological Notes on the Western Coastal Tribes of the Northern Territory of South Australia</span></span>, pp. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia</span></span>, vol. xxxi. 1907).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_339" id="note_339" name="note_339">339.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. R. Brown, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beliefs concerning Childbirth in some Australian Tribes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Man</span></span>, xii. (1912) pp. 180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Three Tribes of Western Australia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xliii. (1913) p. 168.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_340" id="note_340" name="note_340">340.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Those who desire to pursue this subject further may consult with advantage Mr. E. S. Hartland's learned treatise <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Paternity</span></span> (London, 1909-1910), which contains an ample collection of facts and a careful discussion of them. Elsewhere I have argued that the primitive ignorance of paternity furnishes the key to the origin of totemism. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, i. 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, iv. 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_341" id="note_341" name="note_341">341.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jeremiah ii. 27. The ancient Greeks seem also to have had a notion that men were sprung from trees or rocks. See Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Od.</span></span> xix. 163; F. G. Welcker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Götterlehre</span></span> (Göttingen, 1857-1862), i. 777 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“Oak and Rock,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xv. (1901) pp. 322 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_342" id="note_342" name="note_342">342.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The <i xml:lang="he">ashera</i> and the <i xml:lang="he">masseba</i>. See 1 Kings xiv. 23; 2 Kings xviii. 4, xxiii. 14; Micah v. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (in Hebrew, 12 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>); Deuteronomy xvi. 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 203 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. F. Moore, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">svv.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Asherah”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“Massebah.”</span> In the early religion of Crete also the two principal objects of worship seem to have been a sacred tree and a sacred pillar. See A. J. Evans, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xxi. (1901) pp. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_343" id="note_343" name="note_343">343.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to conical images of Semitic goddesses, see above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg034">34</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The sacred pole (<i xml:lang="he">asherah</i>) appears also to have been by some people regarded as the embodiment of a goddess (Astarte), not of a god. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg018">18</a>, note 2. Among the Khasis of Assam the sacred upright stones, which resemble the Semitic <i xml:lang="he">masseboth</i>, are regarded as males, and the flat table-stones as female. See P. R. T. Gurdon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Khasis</span></span> (London, 1907), pp. 112 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> So in Nikunau, one of the Gilbert Islands in the South Pacific, the natives had sandstone slabs or pillars which represented gods and goddesses. <span class="tei tei-q">“If the stone slab represented a goddess it was not placed erect, but laid down on the ground. Being a lady they thought it would be cruel to make her stand so long.”</span> See G. Turner, LL.D., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Samoa</span></span> (London, 1884), p. 296.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_344" id="note_344" name="note_344">344.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg091">91</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_345" id="note_345" name="note_345">345.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the excavations at Gezer, see R. A. Stewart Macalister, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reports on the Excavation of Gezer</span></span> (London, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), pp. 76-89 (reprinted from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quarterly Statement of the Palestine Exploration Fund</span></span>); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bible Side-lights from the Mound of Gezer</span></span> (London, 1906), pp. 57-67, 73-75. Professor Macalister now inclines to regard the socketed stone as a laver rather than as the base of the sacred pole. He supposes that the buried infants were first-born children sacrificed in accordance with the ancient law of the dedication of the first-born. The explanation which I have adopted in the text agrees better with the uninjured state of the bodies, and it is further confirmed by the result of the Austrian excavations at Tell Ta'annek (Taanach) in Palestine, which seem to prove that there children up to the age of two years were not buried in the family graves but interred separately in jars. Some of these sepulchral jars were deposited under or beside the houses, but many were grouped round a rock-hewn altar in a different part of the hill. There is nothing to indicate that any of the children were sacrificed: the size of some of the skeletons precludes the idea that they were slain at birth. Probably they all died natural deaths, and the custom of burying them in or near the house or beside an altar was intended to ensure their rebirth in the family. See Dr. E. Sellin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Tell Ta'annek,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der Kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse</span></span>, l. (Vienna, 1904), No. iv. pp. 32-37, 96 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, p. 59 n.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span>. I have to thank Professor R. A. Stewart Macalister for kindly directing my attention to the excavations at Tell Ta'annek (Taanach). It deserves to be mentioned that in an enclosure close to the standing stones at Gezer, there was found a bronze model of a cobra (R. A. Stewart Macalister, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bible Side-lights</span></span>, p. 76). Perhaps the reptile was the deity of the shrine, or an embodiment of an ancestral spirit.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_346" id="note_346" name="note_346">346.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> See Note I., <span class="tei tei-q">“Moloch the King,”</span> at the end of this volume.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_347" id="note_347" name="note_347">347.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philo of Byblus, quoted by Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praepar. Evang.</span></span> i. 10. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; 2 Kings iii. 27.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_348" id="note_348" name="note_348">348.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg015">15</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_349" id="note_349" name="note_349">349.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philo of Byblus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. pp. 569, 570, 571. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg013">13</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_350" id="note_350" name="note_350">350.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg016">16</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_351" id="note_351" name="note_351">351.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sophocles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Trachiniae</span></span>, 1191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, ii. 7. 7; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 38; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 36.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_352" id="note_352" name="note_352">352.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">[S. Clementis Romani,] <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recognitiones</span></span>, x. 24, p. 233, ed. E. G. Gersdorf (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, i. 1434).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_353" id="note_353" name="note_353">353.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Jud.</span></span> viii. 5. 3, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Apionem</span></span>, i. 18. Whether the quadriennial festival of Hercules at Tyre (2 Maccabees iv. 18-20) was a different celebration, or only <span class="tei tei-q">“the awakening of Melcarth,”</span> celebrated with unusual pomp once in four years, we do not know.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_354" id="note_354" name="note_354">354.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eudoxus of Cnidus, quoted by Athenaeus, ix. 47, p. 392 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">e</span></span>. That the death and resurrection of Melcarth were celebrated in an annual festival at Tyre has been recognised by scholars. See Raoul-Rochette, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), pp. 25 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Hubert et M. Mauss, <span class="tei tei-q">“Essai sur le sacrifice,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Année Sociologique</span></span>, ii. (1899) pp. 122, 124; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 308-311. Iolaus is identified by some modern scholars with Eshmun, a Phoenician and Carthaginian deity about whom little is known. See F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. (Bonn, 1841) pp. 536 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span> (Berlin, 1888), pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span> (Gotha, 1896-1903), i. 268; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 282 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_355" id="note_355" name="note_355">355.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Zenobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Centur.</span></span> v. 56 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Paroemiographi Graeci</span></span>, ed. E. L. Leutsch et F. G. Schneidewin, Göttingen, 1839-1851, vol. i. p. 143).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_356" id="note_356" name="note_356">356.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Quails were perhaps burnt in honour of the Cilician Hercules or Sandan at Tarsus. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg126">126</a>, note 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_357" id="note_357" name="note_357">357.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Alfred Newton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Birds</span></span> (London, 1893-96), p. 755.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_358" id="note_358" name="note_358">358.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. B. Tristram, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Fauna and Flora of Palestine</span></span> (London, 1884), p. 124. For more evidence as to the migration of quails see Aug. Dillmann's commentary on Exodus xvi. 13, pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (Leipsic, 1880).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_359" id="note_359" name="note_359">359.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Tyrian Hercules was said to be a son of Zeus and Asteria (Eudoxus of Cnidus, quoted by Athenaeus, ix. 47, p. 392 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura deorum</span></span>, iii. 16. 42). As to the transformation of Asteria into a quail see Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 4. 1; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 401; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 53; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> iii. 73. The name Asteria may be a Greek form of Astarte. See W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, p. 307.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_360" id="note_360" name="note_360">360.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Quintus Curtius, iv. 2. 10; Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, ii. 24. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_361" id="note_361" name="note_361">361.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, iii. 5. 5, pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Mela, iii. 46; Scymnus Chius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orbis Descriptio</span></span>, 159-161 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geographi Graeci Minores</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, i. 200 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_362" id="note_362" name="note_362">362.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Silius Italicus, iii. 14-32; Mela, iii. 46; Strabo, iii. 5. 3, 5, 7, pp. 169, 170, 172; Diodorus Siculus, v. 20. 2; Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vita Apollonii</span></span>, v. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Appian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hispanica</span></span>, 65. Compare Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, ii. 16. 4. That the bones of Hercules were buried at Gades is mentioned by Mela (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>). Compare Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, i. 36. In Italy women were not allowed to participate in sacrifices offered to Hercules (Aulus Gellius, xi. 6. 2; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> i. 12. 28; Sextus Aurelius Victor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De origine gentis Romanae</span></span>, vi. 6; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaestiones Romanae</span></span>, 60). Whether the priests of Melcarth at Gades were celibate, or had only to observe continence at certain seasons, does not appear. At Tyre the priest of Melcarth might be married (Justin, xviii. 4. 5). The worship of Melcarth under the name of Hercules continued to flourish in the south of Spain down to the time of the Roman Empire. See J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, Première Partie, i. (Paris, 1907) pp. 400 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_363" id="note_363" name="note_363">363.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxi. 21. 9, 22. 5-9; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Divinatione</span></span>, i. 24. 49; Silius Italicus, iii. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 158 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_364" id="note_364" name="note_364">364.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, x. 4. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_365" id="note_365" name="note_365">365.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 674; G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-Book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, p. 351.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_366" id="note_366" name="note_366">366.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Imhoof-Blumer and P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Numismatic Commentary on Pausanias</span></span>, pp. 10-12, with pl. A; Stoll, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Melikertes,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 2634.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_367" id="note_367" name="note_367">367.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Justin, xviii. 6. 1-7; Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> iv. 473 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, v. i. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iii. 545 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Timaeus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, i. 197. Compare W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 373 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The name of Dido has been plausibly derived by Gesenius, Movers, E. Meyer, and A. H. Sayce from the Semitic <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">dôd</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“beloved.”</span> See F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 616; Meltzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Dido,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 1017 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. H. Sayce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lectures on the Religion of the Ancient Babylonians</span></span> (London and Edinburgh, 1887), pp. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> If they are right, the divine character of Dido becomes more probable than ever, since <span class="tei tei-q">“the Beloved”</span> (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Dodah</span></span>) seems to have been a title of a Semitic goddess, perhaps Astarte. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg020">20</a>, note 2. According to Varro it was not Dido but her sister Anna who slew herself on a pyre for love of Aeneas (Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> iv. 682).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_368" id="note_368" name="note_368">368.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Justin, xviii. 6. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_369" id="note_369" name="note_369">369.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Silius Italicus, i. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_370" id="note_370" name="note_370">370.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg016">16</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg110">110</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_371" id="note_371" name="note_371">371.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel xxviii. 14, compare 16.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_372" id="note_372" name="note_372">372.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, ii. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> But, as I have there pointed out, there are grounds for thinking that the custom of walking over fire is not a substitute for human sacrifice, but merely a stringent form of purification. On fire as a purificatory agent see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg179">179</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg188">188</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_373" id="note_373" name="note_373">373.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537. In Greece itself accused persons used to prove their innocence by walking through fire (Sophocles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antigone</span></span>, 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with Jebb's note). Possibly the fire-walk of the priestesses at Castabala was designed to test their chastity. For this purpose the priests and priestesses of the Tshi-speaking people of the Gold Coast submit to an ordeal, standing one by one in a narrow circle of fire. This <span class="tei tei-q">“is supposed to show whether they have remained pure, and refrained from sexual intercourse, during the period of retirement, and so are worthy of inspiration by the gods. If they are pure they will receive no injury and suffer no pain from the fire”</span> (A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</span></span>, London, 1887, p. 138). These cases favour the purificatory explanation of the fire-walk.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_374" id="note_374" name="note_374">374.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iphigenia in Tauris</span></span>, 621-626. Compare Diodorus Siculus, xx. 14. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_375" id="note_375" name="note_375">375.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, vii. 167. This was the Carthaginian version of the story. According to another account, Hamilcar was killed by the Greek cavalry (Diodorus Siculus, xi. 22. 1). His worship at Carthage is mentioned by Athenagoras (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Supplicatio pro Christianis</span></span>, p. 64, ed. J. C. T. Otto, Jena, 1857.) I have called Hamilcar a king in accordance with the usage of Greek writers (Herodotus, vii. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Aristotle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Politics</span></span>, ii. 11; Polybius, vi. 51; Diodorus Siculus, xiv. 54. 5). But the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">suffetes</span></span>, or supreme magistrates, of Carthage were two in number; whether they were elected for a year or for life seems to be doubtful. Cornelius Nepos, who calls them kings, says that they were elected annually (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hannibal</span></span>, vii. 4), and Livy (xxx. 7. 5) compares them to the consuls; but Cicero (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De re publica</span></span>, ii. 23. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) seems to imply that they held office for life. See G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, pp. 115 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_376" id="note_376" name="note_376">376.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Amores</span></span>, 1 and 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_377" id="note_377" name="note_377">377.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg032">32</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_378" id="note_378" name="note_378">378.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, Nos. 23 and 29, PP. 73, 83 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with the notes on pp. 81, 84.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_379" id="note_379" name="note_379">379.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iii. 566-578. The colossal statue found at Amathus may be related, directly or indirectly, to the Egyptian god Bes, who is represented as a sturdy misshapen dwarf, wearing round his body the skin of a beast of the panther tribe, with its tail hanging down. See E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span> (London, 1904), ii. 284 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</span></span> (London, 1897), pp. 159 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; A. Furtwängler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Herakles,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 2143 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_380" id="note_380" name="note_380">380.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">However, human victims were burned at Salamis in Cyprus. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg145">145</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_381" id="note_381" name="note_381">381.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg041">41</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_382" id="note_382" name="note_382">382.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For traces of Phoenician influence in Cilicia see F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, ii. 2, pp. 167-174, 207 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Herodotus says (vii. 91) that the Cilicians were named after Cilix, a son of the Phoenician Agenor.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_383" id="note_383" name="note_383">383.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the fertility and the climate of the plain of Tarsus, which is now very malarious, see E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Asiatic Turkey</span></span> (London, 1879), chaps. i.-vii. The gardens for miles round the city are very lovely, but wild and neglected, full of magnificent trees, especially fine oak, ash, orange, and lemon-trees. The vines run to the top of the highest branches, and almost every garden resounds with the song of the nightingale (E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 35).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_384" id="note_384" name="note_384">384.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 5. 13, pp. 673 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_385" id="note_385" name="note_385">385.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dio Chrysostom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> xxxiii. vol. ii. pp. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 17, ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic, 1857).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_386" id="note_386" name="note_386">386.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, ii. 2, pp. 171 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Types of Greek Coins</span></span> (Cambridge, 1883), pl. x. Nos. 29, 30; B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 614; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span> (London, 1900), pp. 167-176, pl. xxix.-xxxii.; G. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins in the Hunterian Collection</span></span> (Glasgow, 1899-1905), ii. 547; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 727. In later times, from about 175 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> onward, the Baal of Tarsus was completely assimilated to Zeus on the coins. See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 617; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 177, 181.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_387" id="note_387" name="note_387">387.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Luke the Physician, and other Studies in the History of Religion</span></span> (London, 1908), pp. 112 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_388" id="note_388" name="note_388">388.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-q">“On a New Hamathite Inscription at Ibreez,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology</span></span>, iv. (1876) pp. 336-346; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Asiatic Turkey</span></span> (London, 1879), pp. 245-260; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 723-729; Ramsay and Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Prehellenic Monuments of Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</span></span>, xiv. (1903) pp. 77-81, 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with plates iii. and iv.; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Hettiticarum</span></span> (Berlin, 1900), Tafel xxxiv.; Sir W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Luke the Physician</span></span> (London, 1908), pp. 171 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; John Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 191-195, 378 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Of this sculptured group Messrs. W. M. Ramsay and D. G. Hogarth say that <span class="tei tei-q">“it yields to no rock-relief in the world in impressive character”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Journal of Archaeology</span></span>, vi. (1890) p. 347). Professor Garstang would date the sculptures in the tenth or ninth century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> Another inscribed Hittite monument found at Bor, near the site of the ancient Tyana, exhibits a very similar figure of a priest or king in an attitude of adoration. The resemblance extends even to the patterns embroidered on the robe and shawl, which include the well-known <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">swastika</span></em> carved on the lower border of the long robe. The figure is sculptured in high relief on a slab of stone and would seem to have been surrounded by inscriptions, though a portion of them has perished. See J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 185-188, with plate lvi. For the route from Tarsus to Ibreez (Ivriz) see E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Asiatic Turkey</span></span>, pp. 198-244; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_389" id="note_389" name="note_389">389.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg028">28</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_390" id="note_390" name="note_390">390.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537. When Cicero was proconsul of Cilicia (51-50 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>) he encamped with his army for some days at Cybistra, from which two of his letters to Atticus are dated. But hearing that the Parthians, who had invaded Syria, were threatening Cilicia, he hurried by forced marches through the pass of the Cilician Gates to Tarsus. See Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ad Atticum</span></span>, v. 18, 19, 20; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ad Familiares</span></span>, xv. 2, 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_391" id="note_391" name="note_391">391.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. J. Davis, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archaeology</span></span>, iv. (1876) pp. 336 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 346; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Asiatic Turkey</span></span>, pp. 232 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 236 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 270-272. Compare W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span> (London, 1842), ii. 304-307.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_392" id="note_392" name="note_392">392.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span> (London, 1903), pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> On an Assyrian cylinder, now in the British Museum, we see a warlike deity with bow and arrows standing on a lion, and wearing a similar bonnet decorated with horns and surmounted by a star or sun. See De Vogüé, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mélanges d'Archéologie Orientale</span></span> (Paris, 1868), p. 46, who interprets the deity as the great Asiatic goddess. As to the horned god of Ibreez <span class="tei tei-q">“it is a plausible theory that the horns may, in this case, be analogous to the Assyrian emblem of divinity. The sculpture is late and its style rather suggests Semitic influence”</span> (Professor J. Garstang, in some MS. notes with which he has kindly furnished me).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_393" id="note_393" name="note_393">393.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg132">132</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_394" id="note_394" name="note_394">394.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 16 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ii. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_395" id="note_395" name="note_395">395.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The identification is accepted by E. Meyer (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. p. 641), G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 727), and P. Jensen (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span>, Strasburg, 1898, p. 145).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_396" id="note_396" name="note_396">396.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ramsay and Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Pre-Hellenic Monuments of Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</span></span>, xiv. (1893) p. 79.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_397" id="note_397" name="note_397">397.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. 360-362; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 572 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 586 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_398" id="note_398" name="note_398">398.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">That the cradle of the Hittites was in the interior of Asia Minor, particularly in Cappadocia, and that they spread from there south, east, and west, is the view of A. H. Sayce, W. M. Ramsay, D. G. Hogarth, W. Max Müller, F. Hommel, L. B. Paton, and L. Messerschmidt. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Palestine Exploration Fund Quarterly Statement for 1884</span></span>, p. 49; A. H. Sayce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1903), pp. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Max Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asien und Europa</span></span> (Leipsic, 1893), pp. 319 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ramsay and Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Pre-Hellenic Monuments of Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</span></span>, xv. (1893) p. 94; F. Hommel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients</span></span> (Munich, 1904), pp. 42, 48, 54; L. B. Paton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Early History of Syria and Palestine</span></span> (London, 1902), pp. 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span> (London, 1903), pp. 12, 13, 19, 20; D. G. Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Recent Hittite Research,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxix. (1909) pp. 408 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1909) pp. 617 sqq.; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The native Hittite writing is a system of hieroglyphics which has not yet been read, but in their intercourse with foreign nations the Hittites used the Babylonian cuneiform script. Clay tablets bearing inscriptions both in the Babylonian and in the Hittite language have been found by Dr. H. Winckler at Boghaz-Keui, the great Hittite capital in Cappadocia; so that the sounds of the Hittite words, though not their meanings, are now known. According to Professor Ed. Meyer, it seems certain that the Hittite language was neither Semitic nor Indo-European. As to the inscribed tablets of Boghaz-Keui, see H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Vorläufige Nachrichten über die Ausgrabungen in Boghaz-köi im Sommer 1907, 1. Die Tontafelfunde,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft zu Berlin</span></span>, No. 35, December 1907, pp. 1-59; <span class="tei tei-q">“Hittite Archives from Boghaz-Keui,”</span> translated from the German transcripts of Dr. Winckler by Meta E. Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology</span></span>, iv. (Liverpool, 1912), pp. 90-98.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_399" id="note_399" name="note_399">399.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. 351, note 3, with his references; L. B. Paton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 109; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, p. 10; F. Hommel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 42; W. Max Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asien und Europa</span></span>, p. 332. See the preceding note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_400" id="note_400" name="note_400">400.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. H. Sayce, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Hittite Inscriptions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</span></span>, xiv. (1893) pp. 48 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span> (Strasburg, 1898), pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_401" id="note_401" name="note_401">401.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Georgius Syncellus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chronographia</span></span>, vol. i. p. 290, ed. G. Dindorf (Bonn, 1829): Ἡρακλέα τινές φασιν ἐν Φοινίκῃ γνωρίζεσθαι Σάνδαν ἐπιλεγόμενον, ὡς καὶ μεχρὶ νῦν ὑπὸ Καππαδόκων καὶ Κιλίκων. In this passage Σάνδαν is a correction of F. C. Movers's (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 460) for the MS. reading Δισανδάν, the ΔΙ having apparently arisen by dittography from the preceding ΑΙ; and Κιλίκων is a correction of E. Meyer's (<span class="tei tei-q">“Über einige semitische Götter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, xxxi. 737) for the MS. reading Ἱλίων. Compare Jerome (quoted by Movers and Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ll.cc.</span></span>): <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Hercules cognomento Desanaus in Syria Phoenice clarus habetur. Inde ad nostram usque memoriam a Cappadocibus et Eliensibus (al. Deliis) Desanaus adhuc dicitur.</i>”</span> If the text of Jerome is here sound, he would seem to have had before him a Greek original which was corrupt like the text of Syncellus or of Syncellus's authority. The Cilician Hercules is called Sandes by Nonnus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dionys.</span></span>, xxxiv. 183 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Compare Raoul-Rochette in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), pp. 159 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_402" id="note_402" name="note_402">402.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ammianus Marcellinus, xiv. 8. 3; Dio Chrysostom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> xxxiii. vol. ii. p. 16, ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic, 1857). The pyre is mentioned only by Dio Chrysostom, whose words clearly imply that its erection was a custom observed periodically. On Sandan or Sandon see K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sandon und Sardanapal,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kunstarchaeologische Werke</span></span>, iii. 6 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 458 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Raoul-Rochette, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), pp. 178 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Über einige Semitische Götter,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, xxxi. (1877) pp. 736-740: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 641 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> § 484.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_403" id="note_403" name="note_403">403.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins, the Seleucid Kings of Syria</span></span> (London, 1878), pp. 72, 78, 89, 112, pl. xxi. 6, xxiv. 3, xxviii. 8; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span> (London, 1900), pp. 180, 181, 183, 190, 221, 224, 225, pl. xxxiii. 2, 3, xxxiv. 10, xxxvii. 9; F. Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Coin-types of some Kilikian Cities,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xviii. (1898) p. 169, pl. xiii. 1, 2. The structure represented on the coins is sometimes called not the pyre but the monument of Sandan or Sardanapalus. Certainly the cone resting on the square base reminds us of the similar structure on the coins of Byblus as well as of the conical image of Aphrodite at Paphos (see above, pp. 14, 34); but the words of Dio Chrysostom make it probable that the design on the coins of Tarsus represents the pyre. At the same time, the burning of the god may well have been sculptured on a permanent monument of stone. The legend ΟΡΤΥΓΟΘΗΡΑ, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“quail-hunt,”</span> which appears on some coins of Tarsus (G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. lxxxvi. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), may refer to a custom of catching quails and burning them on the pyre. We have seen (above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg111">111</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) that quails were apparently burnt in sacrifice at Byblus. This explanation of the legend on the coins of Tarsus was suggested by Raoul-Rochette (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 201-205). However, Mr. G. F. Hill writes to me that <span class="tei tei-q">“the interpretation of Ὀρτυγοθήρα as anything but a personal name is rendered very unlikely by the analogy of all the other inscriptions on coins of the same class.”</span> Doves were burnt on a pyre in honour of Adonis (below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg147">147</a>). Similarly birds were burnt on a pyre in honour of Laphrian Artemis at Patrae (Pausanias, vii. 18. 12).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_404" id="note_404" name="note_404">404.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodian, iv. 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_405" id="note_405" name="note_405">405.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See Franz Cumont, <span class="tei tei-q">“L'Aigle funéraire des Syriens et l'Apothéose des Empereurs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue de l'Histoire des Religions</span></span>, lxii, (1910) pp. 119-163.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_406" id="note_406" name="note_406">406.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Monnaies Grecques</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1883), pp. 366 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 433, 435, with plates F. 24, 25, H. 14 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen der Konink. Akademie von Wetenschappen</span></span>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, xiv.); F. Imhoof-Blumer und O. Keller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tier- und Pflanzenbilder auf Münzen und Gemmen des klassischen Altertums</span></span> (Leipsic, 1889), pp. 70 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with pl. xii. 7, 8, 9; F. Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Coin-types of some Kilikian Cities,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xviii. (1898) pp. 169-171; P. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Types of Greek Coins</span></span>, pl. xiii. 20; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span>, pp. 178, 179, 184, 186, 206, 213, with plates xxxii. 13, 14, 15, 16, xxxiv. 2, xxxvi. 9; G. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins in the Hunterian Collection</span></span>, ii. 548, with pl. lx. 11. The booted Sandan is figured by G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pl. xxxvi. 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_407" id="note_407" name="note_407">407.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 76; Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Πτέριον. As to the situation of Boghaz-Keui and the ruins of Pteria see W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span> (London, 1842), i. 391 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Barth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reise von Trapezunt durch die nördliche Hälfte Klein-Asiens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ergänzungsheft zu Petermann's Geographischen Mittheilungen</span></span>, No. 2 (1860), pp. 44-52; H. F. Tozer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor</span></span> (London, 1881), pp. 64, 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Historical Relations of Phrygia and Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, N.S., xv. (1883) p. 103; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical Geography of Asia Minor</span></span> (London, 1890), pp. 28 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 596 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. Humann und O. Puchstein, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien</span></span> (Berlin, 1890), pp. 71-80, with Atlas, plates xi.-xiv.; E. Chantre, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission en Cappadoce</span></span> (Paris, 1898), pp. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; O. Puchstein, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Bauten von Boghaz-Köi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft zu Berlin</span></span>, No. 35, December 1907, pp. 62 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_408" id="note_408" name="note_408">408.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This procession of men is broken (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">a</span></span>) by two women clad in long plaited robes like the women on the opposite wall; (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">b</span></span>) by two winged monsters; and (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">c</span></span>) by the figure of a priest or king as to which see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg131">131</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_409" id="note_409" name="note_409">409.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span> (London, 1842), i. 393-395; H. F. Tozer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor</span></span>, pp. 59 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 66-78; W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Historical Relations of Phrygia and Asia Minor,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, N.S. xv. (1883) pp. 113-120; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 623-656, 666-672; K. Humann und O. Puchstein, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien</span></span>, pp. 55-70, with Atlas, plates vii.-x.; E. Chantre, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission en Cappadoce</span></span>, pp. 3-5, 16-26; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, pp. 42-50; Th. Macridy-Bey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Porte des Sphinx à Eyuk</span></span>, pp. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, 1908, No. 3, Berlin); Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 631 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (Boghaz-Keui) 256 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (Eyuk). Compare P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span>, pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In some notes with which my colleague Professor J. Garstang has kindly furnished me he tells me that the two animals wearing Hittite hats, which appear between the great god and goddess in the outer sanctuary, are not bulls but certainly goats; and he inclines to think that the two heaps on which the priest stands in the outer sanctuary are fir-cones. Professor Ed. Meyer holds that the costume which the priestly king wears is that of the Sun-goddess, and that the corresponding figure in the procession of males on the left-hand side of the outer sanctuary does not represent the priestly king but the Sun-goddess in person. <span class="tei tei-q">“The attributes of the King,”</span> he says (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 632), <span class="tei tei-q">“are to be explained by the circumstance that he, as the Hittite inscriptions prove, passed for an incarnation of the Sun, who with the Hittites was a female divinity; the temple of the Sun is therefore his emblem.”</span> As to the title of <span class="tei tei-q">“the Sun”</span> bestowed on Hittite kings in inscriptions, see H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Vorläufige Nachrichten über die Ausgrabungen in Boghaz-köi im Sommer 1907,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft zu Berlin</span></span>, No. 35, December 1907, pp. 32, 33, 36, 44, 45, 53. The correct form of the national name appears to be Chatti or Hatti rather than Hittites, which is the Hebrew form (חתי) of the name. Compare M. Jastrow, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, ii. coll. 2094 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Hittites.”</span></p>
							<p>An interesting Hittite symbol which occurs both in the sanctuary at Boghaz-Keui and at the palace of Euyuk is the double-headed eagle. In both places it serves as the support of divine or priestly personages. After being adopted as a badge by the Seljuk Sultans in the Middle Ages, it passed into Europe with the Crusaders and became in time the escutcheon of the Austrian and Russian empires. See W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 383; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 681-683, pl. viii. E; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, p. 50.</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_410" id="note_410" name="note_410">410.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span>, i. 394 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Barth, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Monatsberichte der königl. Preuss. Akademie der Wissenschaften</span></span>, 1859, pp. 128 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reise von Trapezunt,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ergänzungsheft zu Petermann's Geograph. Mittheilungen</span></span>, No. 2 (Gotha, 1860), pp. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. F. Tozer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor</span></span>, p. 69; E. Chantre, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission en Cappadoce</span></span>, pp. 20 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> According to Barth, the scene represented is the marriage of Aryenis, daughter of Alyattes, king of Lydia, to Astyages, son of Cyaxares, king of the Medes (Herodotus, i. 74). For a discussion of various interpretations which have been proposed see G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 630 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_411" id="note_411" name="note_411">411.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is in substance the view of Raoul-Rochette, Lajard, W. M. Ramsay, G. Perrot, C. P. Tiele, Ed. Meyer, and J. Garstang. See Raoul-Rochette, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), p. 180 note 1; W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Early Historical Relations between Phrygia and Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, N.S. xv. (1883) pp. 113-120; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 630 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 255-257; Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 633 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 235-237; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span> (London, 1913), pp. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_412" id="note_412" name="note_412">412.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">K. Humann und O. Puchstein, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen in Kleinasien und Nordsyrien</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), Atlas, pl. xlv. 3; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ausgrabungen zu Sendschirli</span></span>, iii. (Berlin, 1902) pl. xli.; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, p. 291, with plate lxxvii.; R. Koldewey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Hettitische Inschrift gefunden in der Königsburg von Babylon</span></span> (Leipsic, 1900), plates 1 and 2 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wissenschaftliche Veröffentlichungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft</span></span>, Heft 1); L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Hettiticarum</span></span>, pl. i. 5 and 6; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span> (London, 1903), pp. 40-42, with fig. 6 on p. 41; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1905), p. 93. The name of the god is thought to have been Teshub or Teshup; for a god of that name is known from the Tel-el-Amarna letters to have been the chief deity of the Mitani, a people of Northern Mesopotamia akin in speech and religion to the Hittites, but ruled by an Aryan dynasty. See Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 578, 591 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 636 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span>, pp. 222, 223 (where the god's name is spelt Tishub). The god is also mentioned repeatedly in the Hittite archives which Dr. H. Winckler found inscribed on clay tablets at Boghaz-Keui. See H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Vorläufige Nachrichten über die Ausgrabungen in Boghaz-köi im Sommer 1907,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft zu Berlin</span></span>, No. 35, December 1907, pp. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 32, 34, 36, 38, 39, 43, 44, 51 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 53; <span class="tei tei-q">“Hittite Archives from Boghaz-Keui,”</span> translated from the German transcripts of Dr. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology</span></span>, iv. (Liverpool and London, 1912) pp. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the Mitani, their language and their gods, see H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 30 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 46 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In thus interpreting the Hittite god who heads the procession at Boghaz-Keui I follow my colleague Prof. J. Garstang (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, p. 237; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span>, pp. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), who has kindly furnished me with some notes on the subject. I formerly interpreted the deity as the Hittite equivalent of Tammuz, Adonis, and Attis. But against that view it may be urged that (1) the god is bearded and therefore of mature age, whereas Tammuz and his fellows were regularly conceived as youthful; (2) the thunderbolt which he seems to carry would be quite inappropriate to Tammuz, who was not a god of thunder but of vegetation; and (3) the Hittite Tammuz is appropriately represented in the procession of women immediately behind the Mother Goddess (see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg137">137</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), and it is extremely improbable that he should be represented twice over with different attributes in the same scene. These considerations seem to me conclusive against the interpretation of the bearded god as a Tammuz and decisive in favour of Professor Garstang's view of him.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_413" id="note_413" name="note_413">413.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes of a Journey through Asia Minor,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology</span></span>, i. (Liverpool and London, 1908) pp. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with plate iv.; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 138, 359, with plate xliv. In this sculpture the god on the bull holds in his right hand what is described as a triangular bow instead of a mace, an axe, or a hammer.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_414" id="note_414" name="note_414">414.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ägyptische Geschichte</span></span> (Gotha, 1884), ii. 438-440; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1897) pp. 401 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Max Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Bündnisvortrag Ramses' II. und des Chetitirkönigs</span></span>, pp. 17-19, 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 38-44 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Vorderasiatischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, 1902, No. 5, Berlin); L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, pp. 14-19; J. H. Breasted, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ancient Records of Egypt</span></span> (Chicago, 1906-1907), iii. 163-174; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A History of the Ancient Egyptians</span></span> (London, 1908), p. 311; Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 631, 635 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 347-349. The Hittite copy of the treaty was discovered by Dr. H. Winckler at Boghaz-Keui in 1906. The identification of Arenna or Arinna is uncertain. In a forthcoming article, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Sun God[dess] of Arenna,”</span> to be published in the Liverpool <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology</span></span>, Professor J. Garstang argues that Arenna is to be identified with the Cappadocian Comana.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_415" id="note_415" name="note_415">415.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Dolichenus,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 1191-1194; A. von Domaszewski, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des römischen Heeres</span></span> (Treves, 1895), pp. 59 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with plate iiii. fig. 1 and 2; Franz Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Dolichenus,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, v. i. coll. 1276 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1911) pp. 35-43. For examples of the inscriptions which relate to his worship see H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, vol. ii. Pars i. (Berlin, 1902) pp. 167-172, Nos. 4296-4324.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_416" id="note_416" name="note_416">416.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the lions and mural crown of Cybele see Lucretius, ii. 600 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Catullus, lxiii. 76 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> i. 23. 20; Rapp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kybele,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1644 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_417" id="note_417" name="note_417">417.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 31; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> i. 23. 19. Lucian's description of her image is confirmed by coins of Hierapolis, on which the goddess is represented wearing a high head-dress and seated on a lion. See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 654; G. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins in the Hunterian Collection</span></span> (Glasgow, 1899-1905), iii. 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span>, pp. 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 70, with fig. 7. That the name of the Syrian goddess of Hierapolis-Bambyce was Atargatis is mentioned by Strabo (xvi. 1. 27, p. 748). On Egyptian monuments the Semitic goddess Kadesh is represented standing on a lion. See W. Max Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asien und Europa</span></span>, pp. 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It is to be remembered that Hierapolis-Bambyce was the direct successor of Carchemish, the great Hittite capital on the Euphrates, and may have inherited many features of Hittite religion. See A. H. Sayce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 94 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; and as to the Hittite monuments at Carchemish, see J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 122 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_418" id="note_418" name="note_418">418.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, ii. 9. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_419" id="note_419" name="note_419">419.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>In thus interpreting the youth with the double axe I agree with Sir W. M. Ramsay (<span class="tei tei-q">“On the Early Historical Relations between Phrygia and Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, N.S. xv. (1883) pp. 118, 120), C. P. Tiele (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Alterturm</span></span>, i. 246, 255), and Prof. J. Garstang (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, p. 235; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span>, p. 8). That the youthful figure on the lioness or panther represents the lover of the great goddess is the view also of Professors Jensen and Hommel. See P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span>, pp. 173-175, 180; F. Hommel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients</span></span>, p. 51. Prof. Perrot holds that the youth in question is a double of the bearded god who stands at the head of the male procession, their costume being the same, though their attributes differ (G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 651). But, as I have already remarked, it is unlikely that the same god should be represented twice over with different attributes in the same scene. The resemblance between the two figures is better explained on the supposition that they are Father and Son. The same two deities, Father and Son, appear to be carved on a rock at Giaour-Kalesi, a place on the road which in antiquity may have led from Ancyra by Gordium to Pessinus. Here on the face of the rock are cut in relief two gigantic figures in the usual Hittite costume of pointed cap, short tunic, and shoes turned up at the toes. Each wears a crescent-hilted sword at his side, each is marching to the spectator's left with raised right hand; and the resemblance between them is nearly complete except that the figure in front is beardless and the figure behind is bearded. See G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 714 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, with fig. 352; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 162-164. A similar, but solitary, figure is carved in a niche of the rock at Kara-Bel, but there the deity, or the man, carries a triangular bow over his right shoulder. See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg185">185</a>.</p>
							<p>With regard to the lionesses or panthers, a bas-relief found at Carchemish, the capital of a Hittite kingdom on the Euphrates, shows two male figures in Hittite costume, with pointed caps and turned-up shoes, standing on a crouching lion. The foremost of the two figures is winged and carries a short curved truncheon in his right hand. According to Prof. Perrot, the two figures represent a god followed by a priest or a king. See G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 549 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 123 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Again, on a sculptured slab found at Amrit in Phoenicia we see a god standing on a lion and holding a lion's whelp in his left hand, while in his right hand he brandishes a club or sword. See Perrot et Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iii. 412-414. The type of a god or goddess standing or sitting on a lion occurs also in Assyrian art, from which the Phoenicians and Hittites may have borrowed it. See Perrot et Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 642-644. Much evidence as to the representation of Asiatic deities with lions has been collected by Raoul-Rochette, in his learned dissertation <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), pp. 106 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare De Vogüé, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mélanges d'Archéologie Orientale</span></span>, pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_420" id="note_420" name="note_420">420.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Similarly in Yam, one of the Torres Straits Islands, two brothers named Sigai and Maiau were worshipped in a shrine under the form of a hammer-headed shark and a crocodile respectively, and were represented by effigies made of turtle-shell in the likeness of these animals. But <span class="tei tei-q">“the shrines were so sacred that no uninitiated persons might visit them, nor did they know what they contained; they were aware of Sigai and Maiau, but they did not know that the former was a hammer-headed shark and the latter a crocodile; this mystery was too sacred to be imparted to uninitiates. When the heroes were addressed it was always by their human names, and not by their animal or totem names.”</span> See A. C. Haddon, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Religion of the Torres Straits Islanders,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropological Essays presented to E. B. Tylor</span></span> (Oxford, 1907), p. 185.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_421" id="note_421" name="note_421">421.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“There can be no doubt that there is here represented a Sacred Marriage, the meeting of two deities worshipped in different places, like the Horus of Edfu and the Hathor of Denderah”</span> (C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 255). This view seems to differ from, though it approaches, the one suggested in the text. That the scene represents a Sacred Marriage between a great god and goddess is the opinion also of Prof. Ed. Meyer (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 633 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), and Prof. J. Garstang (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 238 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span>, p. 7).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_422" id="note_422" name="note_422">422.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg133">133</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_423" id="note_423" name="note_423">423.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg285">285</a>. Compare the remarks of Sir W. M. Ramsay (<span class="tei tei-q">“Pre-Hellenic Monuments of Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</span></span>, xiii. (1890) p. 78): <span class="tei tei-q">“Similar priest-dynasts are a widespread feature of the primitive social system of Asia Minor; their existence is known with certainty or inferred with probability at the two towns Komana; at Venasa not far north of Tyana, at Olba, at Pessinous, at Aizanoi, and many other places. Now there are two characteristics which can be regarded as probable in regard to most of these priests, and as proved in regard to some of them: (1) they wore the dress and represented the person of the god, whose priests they were; (2) they were ἱερώνυμοι, losing their individual name at their succession to the office, and assuming a sacred name, often that of the god himself or some figure connected with the cultus of the god. The priest of Cybele at Pessinous was called Attis, the priests of Sabazios were Saboi, the worshippers of Bacchos Bacchoi.”</span> As to the priestly rulers of Olba, see below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg144">144</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_424" id="note_424" name="note_424">424.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg132">132</a>. However, Prof. Ed. Meyer may be right in thinking that the priest-like figure in the procession is not really that of the priest but that of the god or goddess whom he personated. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg133">133</a> note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_425" id="note_425" name="note_425">425.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg036">36</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_426" id="note_426" name="note_426">426.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Vorläufige Nachrichten über die Ausgrabungen in Boghaz-köi im Sommer 1907,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft</span></span>, No. 35, December, 1907, pp. 27 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 29; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 352 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-q">“Hittite Archives from Boghaz-Keui,”</span> translated from the German transcripts of Dr. Winckler by Meta E. Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Archaeology and Anthropology</span></span>, iv. (Liverpool and London, 1912) p. 98. We have seen (above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg136">136</a>) that in the seals of the Hittite treaty with Egypt the Queen appears along with the King. If Dr. H. Winckler is right in thinking (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 29) that one of the Hittite queens was at the same time sister to her husband the King, we should have in this relationship a further proof that mother-kin regulated the descent of the kingship among the Hittites as well as among the ancient Egyptians. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg044">44</a>, and below, vol. ii. pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_427" id="note_427" name="note_427">427.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 629-633.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_428" id="note_428" name="note_428">428.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The figure exhibits a few minor variations on the coins of Tarsus. See the works cited above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg127">127</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_429" id="note_429" name="note_429">429.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg119">119</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_430" id="note_430" name="note_430">430.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 358 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_431" id="note_431" name="note_431">431.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_432" id="note_432" name="note_432">432.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athenaeus, v. 54, p. 215 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>. The high-priest of the Syrian goddess at Hierapolis held office for a year, and wore a purple robe and a golden tiara (Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 42). We may conjecture that the priesthood of Hercules at Tarsus was in later times at least an annual office.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_433" id="note_433" name="note_433">433.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, i. (Stuttgart, 1884) § 389, p. 475; H. Winckler, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 88. Kuinda was the name of a Cilician fortress a little way inland from Anchiale (Strabo, xiv. 5. 10, p. 672).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_434" id="note_434" name="note_434">434.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. § 393, p. 480; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonisch-assyrische Geschichte</span></span>, p. 360. Sandon and Sandas occur repeatedly as names of Cilician men. They are probably identical with, or modified forms of, the divine name. See Strabo, xiv. 5. 14, p. 674; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Poplicola</span></span>, 17; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>, ed. August Boeckh, etc. (Berlin, 1828-1877) vol. iii. p. 200, No. 4401; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span> (Brussels, 1900), p. 718, No. 878; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der Kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosoph.-histor. Classe</span></span>, xliv. (Vienna, 1896) No. vi. pp. 46, 131 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 140 (Inscriptions 115, 218, 232).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_435" id="note_435" name="note_435">435.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 5. 10, p. 672. The name of the high-priest Ajax, son of Teucer, occurs on coins of Olba, dating from about the beginning of our era (B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span>, Oxford, 1887, p. 609); and the name of Teucer is also known from inscriptions. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg145">145</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg151">151</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg159">159</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_436" id="note_436" name="note_436">436.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. L. Hicks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Inscriptions from Western Cilicia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1891) pp. 226, 263; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der Kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften</span></span>, xliv. (1896) No. vi. pp. 53, 88.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_437" id="note_437" name="note_437">437.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, pp. 718 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, No. 878. Tarkondimotos was the name of two kings of Eastern Cilicia in the first century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> One of them corresponded with Cicero and fell at the battle of Actium. See Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist. ad Familiares</span></span>, xv. 1. 2; Strabo, xiv. 5. 18, p. 676; Dio Cassius, xli. 63. 1, xlvii. 26. 2, l. 14. 2, li. 2. 2, li. 7. 4, liv. 9. 2; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antoninus</span></span>, 61; B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 618; W. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1905), ii. pp. 494 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, Nos. 752, 753. Moreover, Tarkudimme or Tarkuwassimi occurs as the name of a king of Erme (?) or Urmi (?) in a bilingual Hittite and cuneiform inscription engraved on a silver seal. See W. Wright, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Empire of the Hittites</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1886), pp. 163 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Hettiticarum</span></span>, pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pl. xlii. 9; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, pp. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span> (Strasburg, 1898), pp. 22, 50 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In this inscription Prof. Jensen suggests Tarbibi- as an alternative reading for Tarku-. Compare P. Kretschmer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</span></span> (Göttingen, 1896), pp. 362-364.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_438" id="note_438" name="note_438">438.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Isocrates, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> ix. 14 and 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Pausanias, ii. 29. 2 and 4; W. E. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span>, i. 212 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the names Teucer and Teucrian see P. Kretschmer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 189-191. Prof. Kretschmer believes that the native population of Cyprus belonged to the non-Aryan stock of Asia Minor.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_439" id="note_439" name="note_439">439.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. E. Engel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kypros</span></span>, i. 216.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_440" id="note_440" name="note_440">440.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De abstinentia</span></span>, ii. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. Inst.</span></span> i. 21. As to the date when the custom was abolished, Lactantius says that it was done <span class="tei tei-q">“recently in the reign of Hadrian.”</span> Porphyry says that the practice was put down by Diphilus, king of Cyprus, <span class="tei tei-q">“in the time of Seleucus the Theologian.”</span> As nothing seems to be known as to the date of King Diphilus and Seleucus the Theologian, I have ventured to assume, on the strength of Lactantius's statement, that they were contemporaries of Hadrian. But it is curious to find kings of Cyprus reigning so late. Beside the power of the Roman governors, their authority can have been little more than nominal, like that of native rajahs in British India. Seleucus the Theologian may be, as J. A. Fabricius supposed (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca Graeca</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> Hamburg, 1780-1809, vol. i. p. 86, compare p. 522), the Alexandrian grammarian who composed a voluminous work on the gods (Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Σέλευκος). Suetonius tells an anecdote (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tiberius</span></span>, 56) about a grammarian named Seleucus who flourished, and faded prematurely, at the court of Tiberius.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_441" id="note_441" name="note_441">441.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 49.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_442" id="note_442" name="note_442">442.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diogenianus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praefatio</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Paroemiographi Graeci</span></span>, ed. E. L. Leutsch et F. G. Schneidewin (Göttingen, 1839-1851), i. 180. Raoul-Rochette regarded the custom as part of the ritual of the divine death and resurrection. He compared it with the burning of Melcarth at Tyre. See his memoir, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (1848), p. 32.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_443" id="note_443" name="note_443">443.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_444" id="note_444" name="note_444">444.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. H. Sayce, in W. Wright's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Empire of the Hittites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 186; W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Pre-Hellenic Monuments of Cappadocia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil de Travaux relatifs à la Philologie et à l'Archéologie Égyptiennes et Assyriennes</span></span>, xiv. (1903) pp. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 251; W. Max Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asien und Europa</span></span>, p. 333; P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span>, pp. 70, 150 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. Hommel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients</span></span>, pp. 44, 51 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, p. 40. Sir W. M. Ramsay thinks (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) that Tark was the native name of the god who had his sanctuary at Dastarkon in Cappadocia and who was called by the Greeks the Cataonian Apollo: his sanctuary was revered all over Cappadocia (Strabo, xiv. 2. 5, p. 537). Prof. Hommel holds that Tarku or Tarchu was the chief Hittite deity, worshipped all over the south of Asia Minor. Prof. W. Max Müller is of opinion that Targh or Tarkh did not designate any particular deity, but was the general Hittite name for <span class="tei tei-q">“god.”</span> There are grounds for holding that the proper name of the Hittite thunder-god was Teshub or Teshup. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg135">135</a> note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_445" id="note_445" name="note_445">445.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Explorations in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) p. 458; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Journey in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1891) p. 222; W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical Geography of Asia Minor</span></span> (London, 1890), pp. 22, 364. Sir W. M. Ramsay had shown grounds for thinking that Olba was a Grecized form of a native name Ourba (pronounced Ourwa) before Mr. J. T. Bent discovered the site and the name.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_446" id="note_446" name="note_446">446.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Theodore Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Explorations in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) pp. 445, 450-453; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Journal in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1891) pp. 208, 210-212, 217-219; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosoph.-historische Classe</span></span>, xliv. (Vienna, 1896) No. vi. pp. 49, 70; D. G. Hogarth and J. A. R. Munro, <span class="tei tei-q">“Modern and Ancient Roads in Eastern Asia Minor,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Royal Geographical Society, Supplementary Papers</span></span>, vol. iii. part 5 (London, 1893), pp. 653 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the Cilician pirates see Strabo, xiv. 5. 2, pp. 668 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pompeius</span></span>, 24; Appian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bellum Mithridat.</span></span> 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Dio Cassius, xxxvi. 20-24 [3-6], ed. L. Dindorf; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De imperio Cn. Pompeii</span></span>, 11 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Th. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman History</span></span> (London, 1868), iii. 68-70, iv. 40-45, 118-120. As to the crests carved on their towns see J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Cilician Symbols,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, iv. (1890) pp. 321 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Among these crests are a club (the badge of Olba), a bunch of grapes, the caps of the Dioscuri, the three-legged symbol, and so on. As to the cedars and ship-building timber of Cilicia in antiquity see Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Plantarum</span></span>, iii. 2. 6, iv. 5. 5. The cedars and firs have now retreated to the higher slopes of the Taurus. Great destruction is wrought in the forests by the roving Yuruks with their flocks; for they light their fires under the trees, tap the firs for turpentine, bark the cedars for their huts and bee-hives, and lay bare whole tracts of country that the grass may grow for their sheep and goats. See J. T. Bent, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) pp. 453-458.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_447" id="note_447" name="note_447">447.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. G. Hogarth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Wandering Scholar in the Levant</span></span> (London, 1896), pp. 57 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_448" id="note_448" name="note_448">448.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Theodore Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Explorations in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) pp. 445 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 458-460; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Journey in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1890) pp. 220-222; E. L. Hicks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Inscriptions from Western Cilicia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span> pp. 262-270; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philos.-histor. Classe</span></span>, xliv. (Vienna, 1896) No. vi. pp. 83-91; W. M. Ramsay and D. G. Hogarth, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Journal of Archaeology</span></span>, vi. (1890) p. 345; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, p. 858, No. 1231. In one place (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. 222) Bent gives the height of Olba as 3800 feet; but this is a misprint, for elsewhere (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. 446, 458) he gives the height as exactly 5850 or roughly 6000 feet. The misprint has unfortunately been repeated by Messrs. Heberdey and Wilhelm (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 84 note 1). The tall tower of Olba is figured on the coins of the city. See G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span> (London, 1900), pl. xxii. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_449" id="note_449" name="note_449">449.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir Charles Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> (London, 1875), ii. 518 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>, Ninth Edition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Caves,”</span> v. 265 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare my notes on Pausanias, i. 35. 7, viii. 29. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_450" id="note_450" name="note_450">450.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) p. 447.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_451" id="note_451" name="note_451">451.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Beaufort, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Karmania</span></span> (London, 1817), pp. 240 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_452" id="note_452" name="note_452">452.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 5. 5, pp. 670 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Mela, i. 72-75, ed. G. Parthey; J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Explorations in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) pp. 446-448; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Journey in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1891) pp. 212-214; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philos.-histor. Classe</span></span>, xliv. (1896) No. vi. pp. 70-79. Mr. D. G. Hogarth was so good as to furnish me with some notes embodying his recollections of the Corycian cave. All these modern writers confirm the general accuracy of the descriptions of the cave given by Strabo and Mela. Mr. Hogarth indeed speaks of exaggeration in Mela's account, but this is not admitted by Mr. A. Wilhelm. As to the ruins of the city of Corycus on the coast, distant about three miles from the cave, see Fr. Beaufort, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Karmania</span></span> (London, 1817), pp. 232-238; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 67-70.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_453" id="note_453" name="note_453">453.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The suggestion is Mr. A. B. Cook's. See his article, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xvii. (1903) p. 418, note 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_454" id="note_454" name="note_454">454.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) p. 448; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id</span></span>., in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1891) pp. 214-216. For the inscription containing the names of the priests see R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 71-79; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, pp. 718 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq</span></span>., No. 878; above, p. 145.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_455" id="note_455" name="note_455">455.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mela, i. 76, ed. G. Parthey (Berlin, 1867). The cave of Typhon is described by J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ll.cc.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_456" id="note_456" name="note_456">456.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aeschylus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Prometheus Vinctus</span></span>, 351-372.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_457" id="note_457" name="note_457">457.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> i. 30 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, who speaks of the giant as <span class="tei tei-q">“bred in the many-named Cilician cave.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_458" id="note_458" name="note_458">458.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 6. 3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_459" id="note_459" name="note_459">459.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, viii. 29. 1, with my notes. Pausanias mentions (viii. 32. 5) bones of superhuman size which were preserved at Megalopolis, and which popular superstition identified as the bones of the giant Hopladamus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_460" id="note_460" name="note_460">460.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, viii. 29. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_461" id="note_461" name="note_461">461.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Holm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte Siciliens im Alterthum</span></span> (Leipsic, 1870-1874), i. 57, 356.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_462" id="note_462" name="note_462">462.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) Edward B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches into the Early History of Mankind</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1878), p. 322, who adduces much more evidence of the same sort.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_463" id="note_463" name="note_463">463.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Explorations in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, N.S. xii. (1890) pp. 448 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Journey in Cilicia Tracheia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xii. (1891) pp. 208-210; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Classe</span></span>, xliv. (Vienna, 1896) No. vi. pp. 51-61.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_464" id="note_464" name="note_464">464.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg026">26</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_465" id="note_465" name="note_465">465.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 616. [However, Mr. G. F. Hill writes to me: <span class="tei tei-q">“The attribution to Tarsus of the 'Atheh coins is unfounded. Head himself only gives it as doubtful. I should think they belong further East.”</span> In the uncertainty which prevails on this point I have left the text unchanged. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Note to Second Edition.</span></span>]</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_466" id="note_466" name="note_466">466.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>The name 'Athar-'atheh occurs in a Palmyrene inscription. See G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, No. 112, pp. 267-270. In analysing Atargatis into 'Athar-'atheh ('Atar-'ata) I follow E. Meyer (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 605, 650 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), F. Baethgen (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span>, pp. 68-75), Fr. Cumont (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Atargatis,”</span> Pauly-Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, ii. 1896), G. A. Cooke (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>), C. P. Tiele (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 245), F. Hommel (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients</span></span>, pp. 43 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), Father Lagrange (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 130), and L. B. Paton (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Atargatis,”</span> J. Hastings's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics</span></span>, ii. 164 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). In the great temple at Hierapolis-Bambyce a mysterious golden image stood between the images of Atargatis and her male partner. It resembled neither of them, yet combined the attributes of other gods. Some interpreted it as Dionysus, others as Deucalion, and others as Semiramis; for a golden dove, traditionally associated with Semiramis, was perched on the head of the figure. The Syrians called the image by a name which Lucian translates <span class="tei tei-q">“sign”</span> (σημήιον). See Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 33. It has been plausibly conjectured by F. Baethgen that the name which Lucian translates <span class="tei tei-q">“sign”</span> was really 'Atheh (עתה), which could easily be confused with the Syriac word for <span class="tei tei-q">“sign”</span> (אהא). See F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 73. A coin of Hierapolis, dating from the third century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>, exhibits the images of the god and goddess seated on bulls and lions respectively, with the mysterious object between them enclosed in a shrine, which is surmounted by a bird, probably a dove. See J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span> (London, 1913), pp. 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 70 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with fig. 7.</p>
							<p>The modern writers cited at the beginning of this note have interpreted the Syrian 'Atheh as a male god, the lover of Atargatis, and identical in name and character with the Phrygian Attis. They may be right; but none of them seems to have noticed that the same name 'Atheh (עתה) is applied to a goddess at Tarsus.</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_467" id="note_467" name="note_467">467.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the image, see above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg137">137</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_468" id="note_468" name="note_468">468.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 31.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_469" id="note_469" name="note_469">469.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn</span></span>, i. 23. 12 and 17-19. The Greek name of Baalbec was Heliopolis, <span class="tei tei-q">“the City of the Sun.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_470" id="note_470" name="note_470">470.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, pp. 163, 164. The statue bears a long inscription, which in the style of its writing belongs to the archaic type represented by the Moabite Stone. The contents of the inscription show that it is earlier than the time of Tiglath-Pileser III. (745-727 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>). On Hadad, the Syrian thunder-god, see F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span>, pp. 66-68; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 248 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> That Hadad was the consort of Atargatis at Hierapolis-Bambyce is the opinion of P. Jensen (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hittiter und Armenier</span></span>, p. 171), who also indicates his character as a god both of thunder and of fertility (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span>, p. 167). The view of Prof. J. Garstang is similar (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span>, pp. 25 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). That the name of the chief male god of Hierapolis-Bambyce was Hadad is rendered almost certain by coins of the city which were struck in the time of Alexander the Great by a priestly king Abd-Hadad, whose name means <span class="tei tei-q">“Servant of Hadad.”</span> See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 654; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian Goddess</span></span>, p. 27, with fig. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_471" id="note_471" name="note_471">471.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 442-449; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens</span></span> (Giessen, 1905-1912), i. 146-150, with <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bildermappe</span></span>, plate 32, fig. 97. The Assyrian relief is also figured in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Marduk,”</span> ii. 2350. The Babylonian <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ramâmu</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“to scream, roar”</span> has its equivalent in the Hebrew <i xml:lang="he">ra'am</i> (רעם) <span class="tei tei-q">“to thunder.”</span> The two names Adad (Hadad) and Ramman occur together in the form Hadadrimmon in Zechariah, xii. 11 (with S. R. Driver's note, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Century Bible</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_472" id="note_472" name="note_472">472.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg121">121</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg123">123</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_473" id="note_473" name="note_473">473.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg130">130</a>. However, the animal seems to be rather a goat. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg133">133</a> note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_474" id="note_474" name="note_474">474.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg132">132</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_475" id="note_475" name="note_475">475.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span>, pp. 181, 182, 185, 188, 190, 228.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_476" id="note_476" name="note_476">476.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, i. (Stuttgart, 1884) pp. 246 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur semitischen Religionsgeschichte</span></span>, pp. 76 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The idolatrous Hebrews spread tables for Gad, that is, for Fortune (Isaiah lxv. 11, Revised Version).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_477" id="note_477" name="note_477">477.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn</span></span>. iii. 8. 2; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> ii. 632.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_478" id="note_478" name="note_478">478.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ephippus, cited by Athenaeus, xii. 53, p. 537.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_479" id="note_479" name="note_479">479.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Baethgen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 77; G. A. Cooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Text-book of North-Semitic Inscriptions</span></span>, p. 269.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_480" id="note_480" name="note_480">480.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg151">151</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_481" id="note_481" name="note_481">481.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 5. 16, p. 675.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_482" id="note_482" name="note_482">482.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), pp. 605 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span>, pp. cxvii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 95-98, plates xv. xvi. xl. 9; G. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins in the Hunterian Collection</span></span>, ii. 536 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pl. lix. 11-14. The male and female figures appear on separate coins. The attribution to Mallus of the coins with the female figure and conical stone has been questioned by Messrs. J. P. Six and G. F. Hill. I follow the view of Messrs. F. Imhoof-Blumer and B. V. Head. [However, Mr. G. F. Hill writes to me that the attribution of these coins to Mallus is no longer maintained by any one. Imhoof-Blumer himself now conjecturally assigns them to Aphrodisias in Cilicia, and Mr. Hill regards this conjecture as very plausible. See F. Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kleinasiatische Münzen</span></span> (Vienna, 1901-1902), ii. 435 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In the uncertainty which still prevails on the subject I have left the text unchanged. For my purpose it matters little whether this Cilician goddess was worshipped at Mallus or at Aphrodisias. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Note to Second Edition.</span></span>]</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_483" id="note_483" name="note_483">483.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg034">34</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_484" id="note_484" name="note_484">484.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philo of Byblus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. 569. El is figured with three pairs of wings on coins of Byblus. See G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, ii. 174; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 72.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_485" id="note_485" name="note_485">485.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kronos,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1572; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span>, pp. cxxii. 99, pl. xvii. 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_486" id="note_486" name="note_486">486.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. cxxi. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 98, pl. xvii. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_487" id="note_487" name="note_487">487.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Another native Cilician deity who masqueraded in Greek dress was probably the Olybrian Zeus of Anazarba or Anazarbus, but of his true nature and worship we know nothing. See W. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1905), ii. p. 267, No. 577; Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἄδανα (where the MS. reading Ολυμβρος was wrongly changed by Salmasius into Ὄλυμπος).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_488" id="note_488" name="note_488">488.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 5. 19, p. 676. The expression of Strabo leaves it doubtful whether the ministers of the goddess were men or women. There was a headland called Sarpedon near the mouth of the Calycadnus River in Western Cilicia (Strabo, xiii. 4. 6, p. 627, xiv. 5. 4, p. 670), where Sarpedon or Sarpedonian Apollo had a temple and an oracle. The temple was hewn in the rock, and contained an image of the god. See R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosoph.-histor. Classe</span></span>, xliv. (Vienna, 1896) No. vi. pp. 100, 107. Probably this Sarpedonian Apollo was a native deity akin to Sarpedonian Artemis.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_489" id="note_489" name="note_489">489.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Asiatic Turkey</span></span>, pp. 128-134; J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-q">“Recent Discoveries in Eastern Cilicia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xi. (1890) pp. 234 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. L. Hicks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Inscriptions from Eastern Cilicia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> pp. 243 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 25 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The site of Hieropolis-Castabala was first identified by J. T. Bent by means of inscriptions. As to the coins of the city, see Fr. Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zur Münzkunde Kilikiens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Numismatik</span></span>, x. (1883) pp. 267-290; G. F. Hill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lycaonia, Isauria, and Cilicia</span></span>, pp. c.-cii. 82-84, pl. xiv. 1-6; G. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of Greek Coins in the Hunterian Collection</span></span>, ii. 534 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_490" id="note_490" name="note_490">490.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the difference between Hieropolis and Hierapolis see (Sir) W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical Geography of Asia Minor</span></span>, pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to him, the cities designated by such names grew up gradually round a sanctuary; where Greek influence prevailed the city in time eclipsed the sanctuary and became known as Hierapolis, or the Sacred City, but where the native element retained its predominance the city continued to be known as Hieropolis, or the City of the Sanctuary.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_491" id="note_491" name="note_491">491.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. L. Hicks, <span class="tei tei-q">“Inscriptions from Eastern Cilicia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xi. (1890) pp. 251-253; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 26. These writers differ somewhat in their reading and restoration of the verses, which are engraved on a limestone basis among the ruins. I follow the version of Messrs. Heberdey and Wilhelm.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_492" id="note_492" name="note_492">492.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent and E. L. Hicks, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 235, 246 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 27.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_493" id="note_493" name="note_493">493.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg115">115</a>. The Cilician Castabala, the situation of which is identified by inscriptions, is not mentioned by Strabo. It is very unlikely that, with his intimate knowledge of Asia Minor, he should have erred so far as to place the city in Cappadocia, to the north of the Taurus mountains, instead of in Cilicia, to the south of them. It is more probable that there were two cities of the same name, and that Strabo has omitted to mention one of them. Similarly, there were two cities called Comana, one in Cappadocia and one in Pontus; at both places the same goddess was worshipped with similar rites. See Strabo, xii. 2. 3, p. 535, xii. 3. 32, p. 557. The situation of the various Castabalas mentioned by ancient writers is discussed by F. Imhoof-Blumer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zur Münzkunde Kilikiens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Numismatik</span></span>, x. (1883) pp. 285-288.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_494" id="note_494" name="note_494">494.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_495" id="note_495" name="note_495">495.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jamblichus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mysteriis</span></span>, iii. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_496" id="note_496" name="note_496">496.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Another Cilician goddess was Athena of Magarsus, to whom Alexander the Great sacrificed before the battle of Issus. See Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, ii. 5. 9; Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Μάγαρσος; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 444. The name of the city seems to be Oriental, perhaps derived from the Semitic word for <span class="tei tei-q">“cave”</span> (מגרה). As to the importance of caves in Semitic religion, see W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 197 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The site of Magarsus appears to be at Karatash, a hill rising from the sea at the southern extremity of the Cilician plain, about forty-five miles due south of Adana. The walls of the city, built of great limestone blocks, are standing to a height of several courses, and an inscription which mentions the priests of Magarsian Athena has been found on the spot. See R. Heberdey und A. Wilhelm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Reisen in Kilikien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkschriften der kaiser. Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosoph.-histor. Classe</span></span>, xliv. (1896) No. vi. pp. 6-10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_497" id="note_497" name="note_497">497.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Atkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western Provinces of India</span></span>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) pp. 826 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_498" id="note_498" name="note_498">498.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Rev. G. E. White (Missionary at Marsovan, in the ancient Pontus), in a letter to me dated 19 Southmoor Road, Oxford, February 11, 1907.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_499" id="note_499" name="note_499">499.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 5. 9, pp. 671 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, ii. 5; Athenaeus, xii. 39, p. 530 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>. Compare Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἀγχιάλη; Georgius Syncellus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chronographia</span></span>, vol. i. p. 312, ed. G. Dindorf (Bonn, 1829). The site of Anchiale has not yet been discovered. At Tarsus itself the ruins of a vast quadrangular structure have sometimes been identified with the monument of Sardanapalus. See E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Asiatic Turkey</span></span>, pp. 37-39; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 536 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> But Mr. D. G. Hogarth tells me that the ruins in question seem to be the concrete foundations of a Roman temple. The mistake had already been pointed out by Mr. R. Koldewey. See his article, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das sogenannte Grab des Sardanapal zu Tarsus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus der Anomia</span></span> (Berlin, 1890), pp. 178-185.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_500" id="note_500" name="note_500">500.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 542 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> They think that the figure probably represented the king in a common attitude of adoration, his right arm raised and his thumb resting on his forefinger.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_501" id="note_501" name="note_501">501.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Hettiticarum</span></span>, pp. 17-19, plates xxi.-xxv.; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 492, 494 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 528-530, 547; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 107-122.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_502" id="note_502" name="note_502">502.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Prof. W. Max Müller is of opinion that the Hittite civilization and the Hittite system of writing were developed in Cilicia rather than in Cappadocia (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asien und Europa</span></span>, p. 350).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_503" id="note_503" name="note_503">503.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">According to Berosus and Abydenus it was not Sardanapalus (Ashurbanipal) but Sennacherib who built or rebuilt Tarsus after the fashion of Babylon, causing the river Cydnus to flow through the midst of the city. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, ii. 504, iv. 282; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonisch-assyrische Geschichte</span></span>, pp. 297 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_504" id="note_504" name="note_504">504.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, ii. 27; Athenaeus, xii. 38, p. 529; Justin, i. 3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_505" id="note_505" name="note_505">505.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, iii. 422 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For the inscriptions referring to him and a full discussion of them, see C. F. Lehmann (-Haupt), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Šamaš-šumukîn, König von Babylonien, 668-648 v. Chr.</span></span> (Leipsic, 1892).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_506" id="note_506" name="note_506">506.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Abydenus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iv. 282; Georgius Syncellus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chronographia</span></span>, i. p. 396, ed. G. Dindorf; E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, i. (Stuttgart, 1884) pp. 576 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, iii. 482-485. C. P. Tiele thought that the story of the death of Saracus might be a popular but mistaken duplicate of the death of Shamash-shumukin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonisch-assyrische Geschichte</span></span>, pp. 410 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Zimri, king of Israel, also burned himself in his palace to escape falling into the hands of his enemies (1 Kings xvi. 18).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_507" id="note_507" name="note_507">507.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_508" id="note_508" name="note_508">508.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Raoul-Rochette, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), p. 274.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_509" id="note_509" name="note_509">509.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Darmesteter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Zend-Avesta</span></span>, vol. i. (Oxford, 1880) pp. lxxxvi., lxxxviii-xc. (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. iv.).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_510" id="note_510" name="note_510">510.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zend-Avesta</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vendîdâd</span></span>, Fargard, v. 7. 39-44 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, iv. 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_511" id="note_511" name="note_511">511.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zend-Avesta</span></span>, translated by J. Darmesteter, i. pp. xc. 9, 110 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, iv.).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_512" id="note_512" name="note_512">512.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xv. 3. 14, p. 732. Even gold, on account of its resemblance to fire, might not be brought near a corpse (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> xv. 3. 18, p. 734).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_513" id="note_513" name="note_513">513.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sardes fell in the autumn of 546 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> (E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, i. (Stuttgart, 1884), p. 604). Bacchylides was probably born between 512 and 505 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> See R. C. Jebb, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bacchylides, the Poems and Fragments</span></span> (Cambridge, 1905), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_514" id="note_514" name="note_514">514.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bacchylides, iii. 24-62.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_515" id="note_515" name="note_515">515.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. G. Welcker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alte Denkmäler</span></span> (Göttingen, 1849-1864), iii. pl. xxxiii.; A. Baumeister, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Denkmäler des klassischen Altertums</span></span> (Munich and Leipsic, 1885-1888), ii. 796, fig. 860; A. H. Smith, <span class="tei tei-q">“Illustrations to Bacchylides,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xviii. (1898) pp. 267-269; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, iii. 618 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It is true that Cambyses caused the dead body of the Egyptian king Amasis to be dragged from the tomb, mangled, and burned; but the deed is expressly branded by the ancient historian as an outrage on Persian religion (Herodotus, iii. 16).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_516" id="note_516" name="note_516">516.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Raoul-Rochette, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), pp. 277 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. Duncker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, iv.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> 330-332; E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, i. (Stuttgart, 1884) p. 604; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire Ancienne des Peuples de l'Orient Classique</span></span>, iii. 618.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_517" id="note_517" name="note_517">517.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_518" id="note_518" name="note_518">518.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg115">115</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg173">173</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_519" id="note_519" name="note_519">519.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 243; Pliny, viii. 155.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_520" id="note_520" name="note_520">520.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ctesias and the Semiramis Legend,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Historical Review</span></span>, ii. (1887) pp. 303-317. But the legend of Semiramis appears to have gathered round the person of a real Assyrian queen, by name Shammuramat, who lived towards the end of the ninth century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> and is known to us from historical inscriptions. See C. F. Lehmann-Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die historische Semiramis und ihre Zeit</span></span> (Tübingen, 1910), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Semiramis,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, iv. 678 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Scapegoat</span></span>, pp. 369 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_521" id="note_521" name="note_521">521.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg114">114</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_522" id="note_522" name="note_522">522.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In ancient Greece we seem to have a reminiscence of widow-burning in the legend that when the corpse of Capaneus was being consumed on the pyre, his wife Evadne threw herself into the flames and perished. See Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Supplices</span></span>, 980 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 7. 1; Zenobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cent.</span></span> i. 30; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tristia</span></span>, v. 14. 38.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_523" id="note_523" name="note_523">523.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Isaiah xxx. 33. The Revised Version has <span class="tei tei-q">“a Topheth”</span> instead of <span class="tei tei-q">“Tophet.”</span> But Hebrew does not possess an indefinite article (the few passages of the Bible in which the Aramaic חת is so used are no exception to the rule), and there is no evidence that Tophet (Topheth) was ever employed in a general sense. The passage of Isaiah has been rightly interpreted by W. Robertson Smith in the sense indicated in the text, though he denies that it contains any reference to the sacrifice of the children. See his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lectures on the Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 372 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> He observes (p. 372, note 3): <span class="tei tei-q">“Saul's body was burned (1 Sam. xxxi. 12), possibly to save it from the risk of exhumation by the Philistines, but perhaps rather with a religious intention, and almost as an act of worship, since his bones were buried under the sacred tamarisk at Jabesh.”</span> In 1 Chronicles x. 12 the tree under which the bones of Saul were buried is not a tamarisk but a terebinth or an oak.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_524" id="note_524" name="note_524">524.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Chronicles xvi. 14, xxi. 19; Jeremiah xxxiv. 5. There is no ground for assuming, as the Authorized version does in Jeremiah xxxiv. 5, that only spices were burned on these occasions; indeed the burning of spices is not mentioned at all in any of the three passages. The <span class="tei tei-q">“sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries' art,”</span> which were laid in the dead king's bed (2 Chronicles xvi. 14), were probably used to embalm him, not to be burned at his funeral. For though <span class="tei tei-q">“great burnings”</span> were regularly made for the dead kings of Judah, there is no evidence (apart from the doubtful case of Saul) that their bodies were cremated. They are regularly said to have been buried, not burnt. The passage of Isaiah seems to show that what was burned at a royal funeral was a great, but empty, pyre. That the burnings for the kings formed part of a heathen custom was rightly perceived by Renan (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire du peuple d'Israel</span></span>, iii. 121, note).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_525" id="note_525" name="note_525">525.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bell. Jud.</span></span> v. 4. 1. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Jerusalem,”</span> vol. ii. 2423 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_526" id="note_526" name="note_526">526.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the Moloch worship, see Note I. at the end of the volume. I have to thank the Rev. Professor R. H. Kennett for indicating to me the inference which may be drawn from the identification of the Valley of Hinnom with the Tyropoeon.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_527" id="note_527" name="note_527">527.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. M. Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land and the Book, Central Palestine and Phoenicia</span></span> (London, 1883), pp. 575-579; Ed. Robinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Biblical Researches in Palestine</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1867), ii. 430. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; K. Baedeker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Palestine and Syria</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), p. 255.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_528" id="note_528" name="note_528">528.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, v. 92. 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_529" id="note_529" name="note_529">529.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Bock, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Temples and Elephants</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 73-76.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_530" id="note_530" name="note_530">530.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This view was maintained long ago by Raoul-Rochette in regard to the deaths both of Sardanapalus and of Croesus. He supposed that <span class="tei tei-q">“the Assyrian monarch, reduced to the last extremity, wished, by the mode of death which he chose, to give to his sacrifice the form of an apotheosis and to identify himself with the national god of his country by allowing himself to be consumed, like him, on a pyre.... Thus mythology and history would be combined in a legend in which the god and the monarch would finally be confused. There is nothing in this which is not conformable to the ideas and habits of Asiatic civilization.”</span> See his memoir, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sur l'Hercule Assyrien et Phénicien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</span></span>, xvii. Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1848), pp. 247 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 271 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The notion of regeneration by fire was fully recognized by Raoul-Rochette (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 30 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). It deserves to be noted that Croesus burned on a huge pyre the great and costly offerings which he dedicated to Apollo at Delphi. He thought, says Herodotus (i. 50), that in this way the god would get possession of the offerings.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_531" id="note_531" name="note_531">531.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>As to Isis see Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isis et Osiris</span></span>, 16. As to Demeter see Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hymn to Demeter</span></span>, 231-262; Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 5. 1; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iv. 547-560. As to Thetis see Apollonius Rhodius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argon</span></span>, iv. 865-879; Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibl.</span></span> iii. 13. 6. Most of these writers express clearly the thought that the fire consumed the mortal element, leaving the immortal. Thus Plutarch says, περικαίειν τὰ θνητὰ τοῦ σώματος. Apollodorus says (i. 5. 1), εἰς πῦρ κατετίθει τὸ βρέφος καὶ περιῄρει τὰς θνητὰς σάρκας αὐτοῦ, and again (iii. 13. 6), εἰς τὸ πῦρ ἐγκρυβοῦσα τῆς νυκτὸς ἔφθειρεν ὂ ἦν αὐτῷ θνητὸν πατρῷον. Apollonius Rhodius says,</p>
							<p>ἡ μὲν γὰρ βροτέας αἰεὶ περὶ σάρκας ἔδαιεν νύκτα διὰ μέσσην φλογμῷ πυρός.</p>
							<p>And Ovid has,</p>
							<p>
								<span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Inque foco pueri corpus vivente favilla Obruit, humanum purget ut ignis onus.</i>”</span>
							</p>
							<p>On the custom of passing children over a fire as a purification, see my note, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Youth of Achilles,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, vii. (1893) pp. 293 sq. On the purificatory virtue which the Greeks ascribed to fire see also Erwin Rohde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903), ii. 101, note 2. The Warramunga of Central Australia have a tradition of a great man who <span class="tei tei-q">“used to burn children in the fire so as to make them grow strong”</span> (B. Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, London, 1904, p. 429).</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_532" id="note_532" name="note_532">532.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">She is said to have thus restored the youth of her husband Jason, her father-in-law Aeson, the nurses of Dionysus, and all their husbands (Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Medea</span></span>, Argum.; Scholiast on Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Knights</span></span>, 1321; compare Plautus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pseudolus</span></span>, 879 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>); and she applied the same process with success to an old ram (Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibl.</span></span> i. 9. 27; Pausanias, viii. 11. 2; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 24).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_533" id="note_533" name="note_533">533.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> i. 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, with the Scholiast; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 152.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_534" id="note_534" name="note_534">534.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jamblichus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mysteriis</span></span>, v. 12.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_535" id="note_535" name="note_535">535.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De morte Peregrini</span></span>, 27 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_536" id="note_536" name="note_536">536.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diogenes Laertius, viii. 2. 69 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_537" id="note_537" name="note_537">537.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De morte Peregrini</span></span>, 25; Strabo, xv. 1. 64 and 68, pp. 715, 717; Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, vii. 3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_538" id="note_538" name="note_538">538.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_539" id="note_539" name="note_539">539.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_540" id="note_540" name="note_540">540.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De magistratibus</span></span>, iii. 64.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_541" id="note_541" name="note_541">541.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg144">144</a>, note 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_542" id="note_542" name="note_542">542.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaestiones Graecae</span></span>, 45. Zeus Labrandeus was worshipped at the village of Labraunda, situated in a pass over the mountains, near Mylasa in Caria. The temple was ancient. A road called the Sacred Way led downhill for ten miles to Mylasa, a city of white marble temples and colonnades which stood in a fertile plain at the foot of a precipitous mountain, where the marble was quarried. Processions bearing the holy emblems went to and fro along the Sacred Way from Mylasa to Labraunda. See Strabo, xiv. 2. 23, pp. 658 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The double-headed axe figures on the ruins and coins of Mylasa (Ch. Fellows, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Account of Discoveries in Lycia</span></span>, London, 1841, p. 75; B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span>, Oxford, 1887, pp. 528 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). A horseman carrying a double-headed axe is a type which occurs on the coins of many towns in Lydia and Phrygia. At Thyatira this axe-bearing hero was called Tyrimnus, and games were held in his honour. He was identified with Apollo and the sun. See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lydia</span></span> (London, 1901), p. cxxviii. On a coin of Mostene in Lydia the double-headed axe is represented between a bunch of grapes and ears of corn, as if it were an emblem of fertility (B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 162, pl. xvii. 11).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_543" id="note_543" name="note_543">543.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Mythologie</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Berlin, 1894) pp. 141 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the Hittite thunder-god and his axe see above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg134">134</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_544" id="note_544" name="note_544">544.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nicolaus Damascenus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. 382 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_545" id="note_545" name="note_545">545.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> iii. 381.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_546" id="note_546" name="note_546">546.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 84.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_547" id="note_547" name="note_547">547.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chronic.</span></span> i. 69, ed. A. Schoene (Berlin, 1866-1875).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_548" id="note_548" name="note_548">548.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 50. At Thebes there was a stone lion which was said to have been dedicated by Hercules (Pausanias, ix. 17. 2).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_549" id="note_549" name="note_549">549.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), p. 553; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lydia</span></span> (London, 1901), pp. xcviii, 239, 240, 241, 244, 247, 253, 254, 264, with plates xxiv. 9-11, 13, XXV. 2, 12, xxvii. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_550" id="note_550" name="note_550">550.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg143">143</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_551" id="note_551" name="note_551">551.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, ii. 106; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, iv. 742-752; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Hettiticarum</span></span>, pp. 33-37, with plates xxxvii., xxxviii.; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 170-173, with plate liv.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_552" id="note_552" name="note_552">552.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 24. 2, v. 13. 7 with my note; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 752-759; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pl. xxxix. 1; J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 167-170, with plate liii. Unlike most Hittite sculptures the figure of Mother Plastene is carved almost in the round. The inscriptions which accompany both these Lydian monuments are much defaced.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_553" id="note_553" name="note_553">553.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The suggestion that the Heraclid kings of Lydia were Hittites, or under Hittite influence, is not novel. See W. Wright, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Empire of the Hittites</span></span>, p. 59; E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Alterthums</span></span>, i. (Stuttgart, 1884) p. 307, § 257; Fr. Hommel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des alten Orients</span></span>, p. 54, note 2; L. Messerschmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hittites</span></span>, p. 22.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_554" id="note_554" name="note_554">554.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg110">110</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_555" id="note_555" name="note_555">555.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Roman.</span></span> i. 27. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_556" id="note_556" name="note_556">556.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nonnus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dionys.</span></span> xxv. 451-551; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxv. 14. The story, as we learn from Pliny, was told by Xanthus, an early historian of Lydia.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_557" id="note_557" name="note_557">557.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Thus Glaucus, son of Minos, was restored to life by the seer Polyidus, who learned the trick from a serpent. See Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 3. 1. For references to other tales of the same sort see my note on Pausanias, ii. 10. 3 (vol. iii. pp. 65 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). The serpent's acquaintance with the tree of life in the garden of Eden perhaps belongs to the same cycle of stories.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_558" id="note_558" name="note_558">558.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lydia</span></span>, pp. cxi-cxiii, with pl. xxvii. 12. On the coins the champion's name appears as Masnes or Masanes, but the reading is doubtful. The name Masnes occurred in Xanthus's history of Lydia (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iv. 629). It is probably the same with Manes, the name of a son of Zeus and Earth, who is said to have been the first king of Lydia (Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ant. Rom.</span></span> i. 27. 1). Manes was the father of King Atys (Herodotus, i. 94). Thus Tylon was connected with the royal family of Lydia through his champion as well as in the ways mentioned in the text.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_559" id="note_559" name="note_559">559.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_560" id="note_560" name="note_560">560.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg183">183</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_561" id="note_561" name="note_561">561.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lydia</span></span>, p. cxiii.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_562" id="note_562" name="note_562">562.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lydia</span></span>, pp. cx, cxiii. The festival seems to be mentioned only on coins.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_563" id="note_563" name="note_563">563.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg154">154</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_564" id="note_564" name="note_564">564.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">V. Hehn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kulturpflanzen und Haustiere</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">7</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), p. 261. He would derive the name from the Semitic, or at all events the Cilician language. The Hebrew word for saffron is <i xml:lang="he">karkôm</i>. As to the spring flowers of North-Western Asia Minor, W. M. Leake remarks (April 1, 1800) that <span class="tei tei-q">“primroses, violets, and crocuses, are the only flowers to be seen”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of a Tour in Asia Minor</span></span>, London, 1824, p. 143). Near Mylasa in Caria, Fellows saw (March 20, 1840) the broom covered with yellow blossoms and a great variety of anemones, like <span class="tei tei-q">“a rich Turkey carpet, in which the green grass did not form a prominent colour amidst the crimson, lilac, blue, scarlet, white, and yellow flowers”</span> (Ch. Fellows, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Account of Discoveries in Lycia</span></span>, London, 1841, pp. 65, 66). In February the yellow stars of <i xml:lang="la">Gagea arvensis</i> cover the rocky and grassy grounds of Lycia, and the field-marigold often meets the eye. At the same season in Lycia the shrub <i xml:lang="la">Colutea arborescens</i> opens its yellow flowers. See T. A. B. Spratt and E. Forbes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Lycia</span></span> (London, 1847), ii. 133. I must leave it to others to identify the Golden Flower of Sardes.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_565" id="note_565" name="note_565">565.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 538. Mount Argaeus still retains its ancient name in slightly altered forms (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Ardjeh</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Erdjich</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Erjäus</span></span>). Its height is about 13,000 feet. In the nineteenth century it was ascended by at least two English travellers, W. J. Hamilton and H. F. Tozer. See W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span>, ii. 269-281; H. F. Tozer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Turkish Armenia and Eastern Asia Minor</span></span>, pp. 94, 113-131; Élisée Reclus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</span></span> (Paris, 1879-1894), ix. 476-478. A Hittite inscription is carved at a place called Tope Nefezi, near Asarjik, on the slope of Mount Argaeus. See J. Garstang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of the Hittites</span></span>, pp. 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_566" id="note_566" name="note_566">566.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. F. Tozer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 125-127.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_567" id="note_567" name="note_567">567.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xv. 3. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pp. 732 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A bundle of twigs, called the Barsom (<i xml:lang="fa">Beresma</i> in the Avesta), is still used by the Parsee priests in chanting their liturgy. See M. Haug, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings and Religion of the Parsis</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 4, note 1, 283. When a potter in Southern India is making a pot which is to be worshipped as a household deity, he <span class="tei tei-q">“should close his mouth with a bandage, so that his breath may not defile the pot.”</span> See E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1909), iv. 151.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_568" id="note_568" name="note_568">568.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Baron Charles Hügel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Kashmir and the Panjab</span></span> (London, 1845), pp. 42-46; W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Things Indian</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 219.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_569" id="note_569" name="note_569">569.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jonas Hanway, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Historical Account of the British Trade over the Caspian Sea: with the Author's Journal of Travels</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1754), i. 263. For later descriptions of the fires and fire-worshippers of Baku, see J. Reinegg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beschreibung des Kaukasus</span></span> (Gotha, Hildesheim, and St. Petersburg, 1796-1797), i. 151-159; A. von Haxthausen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transkaukasia</span></span> (Leipsic, 1856), ii. 80-85. Compare W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Things Indian</span></span>, p. 219.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_570" id="note_570" name="note_570">570.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 8. 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, p. 579; xiii. 4. 11, p. 628. The wine of the district is mentioned by Vitruvius (viii. 3. 12) and Pliny (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xiv. 75).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_571" id="note_571" name="note_571">571.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span>, i. 136-140, ii. 131-138. One of the three recent cones described by Strabo is now called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Kara Devlit</span></span>, or Black Inkstand. Its top is about 2500 feet above the sea, but only 500 feet above the surrounding plain. The adjoining town of Koula, built of the black lava on which it stands, has a sombre and dismal look. Another of the cones, almost equally high, has a crater of about half a mile in circumference and three or four hundred feet deep.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_572" id="note_572" name="note_572">572.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiii. 4. 11, p. 628. Compare his account of the Catanian vineyards (vi. 2. 3, p. 269).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_573" id="note_573" name="note_573">573.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 8. 16-18, pp. 578 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; xiii. 4. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, p. 628.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_574" id="note_574" name="note_574">574.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 8. 18, p. 579. Compare Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals</span></span>, xii. 58.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_575" id="note_575" name="note_575">575.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, i. 3. 16, p. 57. Compare Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Pythiae oraculis</span></span>, 11; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> ii. 202; Justin, xxx. 4. The event seems to have happened in 197 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> Several other islands are known to have appeared in the same bay both in ancient and modern times. So far as antiquity is concerned, the dates of their appearance are given by Pliny, but some confusion on the subject has crept into his mind, or rather, perhaps, into his text. See the discussion of the subject in W. Smith's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography</span></span> (London, 1873), ii. 1158-1160. As to the eruptions in the bay of Santorin, the last of which occurred in 1866 and produced a new island, see Sir Charles Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> (London, 1875), i. 51, ii. 65 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</span></span> (Breslau, 1885), pp. 272 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> There is a monograph on Santorin and its eruptions (F. Fouqué, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Santorin et ses éruptions</span></span>, Paris, 1879). Strabo has given a brief but striking account of Rhodes, its architecture, its art-treasures, and its constitution (xiv. 2. 5, pp. 652 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). As to the Rhodian schools of art see H. Brunn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der griechischen Künstler</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1857-1859), i. 459 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 233 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 286 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_576" id="note_576" name="note_576">576.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Acharn.</span></span> 682; Pausanias, iii. 11. 9, vii. 21. 7; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theseus</span></span>, 36; Aristides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isthmic.</span></span> vol. i. p. 29, ed. G. Dindorf (Leipsic, 1829); Appian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bell. Civ.</span></span> v. 98; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> i. 17. 22; G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1898-1901), ii. p. 230, No. 543.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_577" id="note_577" name="note_577">577.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cornutus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theologiae Graecae Compendium</span></span>, 22.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_578" id="note_578" name="note_578">578.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Xenophon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hellenica</span></span>, iv. 7. 4. As to the Spartan headquarters staff (οἱ περὶ δαμοσίαν), see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> iv. 5. 8, vi. 4. 14; Xenophon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Respublica Lacedaem</span></span>. xiii. 1, xv. 4. Usually the Spartans desisted from any enterprise they had in hand when an earthquake happened (Thucydides, iii. 59. 1, v. 50. 5, vi. 95. 1).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_579" id="note_579" name="note_579">579.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Thucydides, v. 70. 1. The use of the music, Thucydides tells us, was not to inspire the men, but to enable them to keep step, and so to march in close order. Without music a long line of battle was apt to straggle in advancing to the charge. As missiles were little used in Greek warfare, there was no need to hurry the advance over the intervening ground; so it was made deliberately and with the bands playing. The air to which the Spartans charged was called Castor's tune. It was the king in person who gave the word for the flutes to strike up. See Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lycurgus</span></span>, 22.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_580" id="note_580" name="note_580">580.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Xenophon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Respublica Lacedaem</span></span>. xi. 3; Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lysistrata</span></span>, 1140; Aristotle, cited by a scholiast on Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Acharn.</span></span> 320; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Instituta Laconica</span></span>, 24. When a great earthquake had destroyed the city of Sparta and the Messenians were in revolt, the Spartans sent a messenger to Athens asking for help. Aristophanes (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lysistrata</span></span>, 1138 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) describes the man as if he had seen him, sitting as a suppliant on the altar with his pale face and his red coat.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_581" id="note_581" name="note_581">581.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I have assumed that the sun shone on the Spartans at Thermopylae. For the battle was fought in the height of summer, when the Greek sky is generally cloudless, and on that particular morning the weather was very still. The evening before, the Persians had sent round a body of troops by a difficult pass to take the Spartans in the rear; day was breaking when they neared the summit, and the first intimation of their approach which reached the ears of the Phocian guards posted on the mountain was the loud crackling of leaves under their feet in the oak forest. Moreover, the famous Spartan saying about fighting in the shade of the Persian arrows, which obscured the sun, points to bright, hot weather. It was at high noon, and therefore probably in the full blaze of the mid-day sun, that the last march-out took place. See Herodotus, vii. 215-226; and as to the date of the battle (about the time of the Olympic games) see Herodotus, vii. 206, viii. 12 and 26; G. Busolt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Geschichte</span></span>, ii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Gotha, 1895) p. 673, note 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_582" id="note_582" name="note_582">582.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reizen en Onderzoekingen in den Indischen Archipel</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1857), ii. 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indonesien</span></span> (Berlin, 1884-1889), ii. 3. The beliefs and customs of the East Indian peoples in regard to earthquakes have been described by G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel</span></span>, Tweede Stuk (Leyden, 1885), pp. 247-254; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), iii. 274-281. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span> (Leyden, 1893), pp. 604 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; and on primitive conceptions of earthquakes in general, E. B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Culture</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1873), i. 364-366; R. Lasch, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Ursache und Bedeutung der Erdbeben im Volksglauben und Volksbrauch,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, v. (1902) pp. 236-257, 369-383.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_583" id="note_583" name="note_583">583.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Epiphanius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Haereses</span></span>, ii. 2. 23 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xlii. 68).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_584" id="note_584" name="note_584">584.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. N. van der Tuuk, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Kawi Language and Literature,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, N.S. xiii. (1881) p. 50.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_585" id="note_585" name="note_585">585.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. F. Riedel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</span></span> (The Hague, 1886), p. 398; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> pp. 330, 428.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_586" id="note_586" name="note_586">586.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Bamler, <span class="tei tei-q">“Tami,”</span> in R. Neuhauss's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsch Neu-Guinea</span></span>, iii. (Berlin, 1911) p. 492.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_587" id="note_587" name="note_587">587.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mrs. Leslie Milne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Shans at Home</span></span> (London, 1910), p. 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_588" id="note_588" name="note_588">588.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">De St. Cricq, <span class="tei tei-q">“Voyage du Pérou au Brésil par les fleuves Ucayali et Amazone, Indiens Conibos,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), iv<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">e</span></span> Série, vi. (1853) p. 292.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_589" id="note_589" name="note_589">589.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Miss Alice Werner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natives of British Central Africa</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 56.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_590" id="note_590" name="note_590">590.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. Lechaptois, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aux Rives du Tanganika</span></span> (Algiers, 1913), p. 217.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_591" id="note_591" name="note_591">591.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), pp. 313 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_592" id="note_592" name="note_592">592.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ködding, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die batakschen Götter und ihr Verhältniss zum Brahmanismus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</span></span>, xii. (1885) p. 405.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_593" id="note_593" name="note_593">593.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het Animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span>, ii. 279; H. N. van der Tuuk, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_594" id="note_594" name="note_594">594.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. F. Riedel, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Topantunuasu of oorspronkelijke Volkstammen van Central Selebes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, xxxv. (1886) p. 95.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_595" id="note_595" name="note_595">595.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands</span></span> (London, 1838), p. 379.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_596" id="note_596" name="note_596">596.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Turner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Samoa</span></span> (London, 1884), p. 211; Ch. Wilkes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</span></span>, New Edition (New York, 1851), ii. 131.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_597" id="note_597" name="note_597">597.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Schadenburg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Bewohner von Süd-Mindanao und der Insel Samal,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xvii. (1885) p. 32.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_598" id="note_598" name="note_598">598.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mariner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1818), ii. 112 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_599" id="note_599" name="note_599">599.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sangermano, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description of the Burmese Empire</span></span> (Rangoon, 1885), p. 130.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_600" id="note_600" name="note_600">600.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. A. Kleintitschen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</span></span> (Hiltrup bei Münster, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 336.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_601" id="note_601" name="note_601">601.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Pinart, <span class="tei tei-q">“Les Indiens de l'État de Panama,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue d'Ethnographie</span></span>, vi. (1887) p. 119.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_602" id="note_602" name="note_602">602.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. J. Payne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of the New World called America</span></span>, i. (Oxford, 1892) p. 469.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_603" id="note_603" name="note_603">603.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</span></span> (London, 1887), pp. 35 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_604" id="note_604" name="note_604">604.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Jackson, in J. E. Erskine's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of a Cruise among the Islands of the Western Pacific</span></span> (London, 1853), p. 473. My friend, the late Mr. Lorimer Fison, wrote to me (December 15, 1906) that the name of the Fijian earthquake god is Maui, not A Dage, as Jackson says. Mr. Fison adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“I have seen Fijians stamping and smiting the ground and yelling at the top of their voices in order to rouse him.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_605" id="note_605" name="note_605">605.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von Rosenberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</span></span>, xxx. (Batavia, 1863) p. 118; Th. C. Rappard, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het eiland Nias en zijne bewoners,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, lxii. (1909) p. 582. In Soerakarta, a district of Java, when an earthquake takes place the people lie flat on their stomachs on the ground, and lick it with their tongues so long as the earthquake lasts. This they do in order that they may not lose their teeth prematurely. See J. W. Winter, <span class="tei tei-q">“Beknopte Beschrijving van het hof Soerokarta in 1824,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, liv. (1902) p. 85. The connexion of ideas in this custom is not clear.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_606" id="note_606" name="note_606">606.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On this question see C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</span></span> (Breslau, 1885), pp. 332-336. As to the frequency of earthquakes in Achaia and Asia Minor see Seneca, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist.</span></span> xiv. 3. 9; and as to Achaia in particular see C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 324-326. On the coast of Achaia there was a chain of sanctuaries of Poseidon (L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Mythologie</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> 575).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_607" id="note_607" name="note_607">607.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See Sir Ch. Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> ii. 147 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Milne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Earthquakes</span></span> (London, 1886), pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_608" id="note_608" name="note_608">608.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See, for example, Thucydides, iii. 89.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_609" id="note_609" name="note_609">609.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, viii. 7. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pp. 384 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, xv. 49; Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Anim.</span></span> xi. 19; Pausanias, vii. 24. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> and 12, vii. 25. 1 and 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_610" id="note_610" name="note_610">610.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, xv. 49. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Among the most famous seats of the worship of Poseidon in Peloponnese were Taenarum in Laconia, Helice in Achaia, Mantinea in Arcadia, and the island of Calauria, off the coast of Troezen. See Pausanias, ii. 33. 2, iii. 25. 4-8, vii. 24. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, viii. 10. 2-4. Laconia as well as Achaia has suffered much from earthquakes, and it contained many sanctuaries of Poseidon. We may suppose that the deity was worshipped here chiefly as the earthquake god, since the rugged coasts of Laconia are ill adapted to maritime enterprise, and the Lacedaemonians were never a seafaring folk. See C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</span></span>, pp. 330 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 335 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For Laconian sanctuaries of Poseidon see Pausanias, iii. 11. 9, iii. 12. 5, iii. 14. 2 and 7, iii. 15. 10, iii. 20. 2, iii. 21. 5, iii. 25. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_611" id="note_611" name="note_611">611.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir Ch. Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> i. 391 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 590.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_612" id="note_612" name="note_612">612.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Extract from a Letter of Mr. Alexander Loudon,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, ii. (1832) pp. 60-62; Sir Ch. Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> i. 590.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_613" id="note_613" name="note_613">613.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir Ch. Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_614" id="note_614" name="note_614">614.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucretius, vi. 738 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_615" id="note_615" name="note_615">615.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, v. 4. 5, p. 244, xii. 8. 17, p. 579, xiii. 4. 14, p. 629, xiv. 1. 11 and 44, pp. 636, 649; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De divinatione</span></span>, i. 36. 79; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> ii. 208. Compare [Aristotle,] <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mundo</span></span>, 4, p. 395 B, ed. Bekker.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_616" id="note_616" name="note_616">616.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vii. 84, who says that some people looked on Mefitis as a god, the male partner of Leucothoë, to whom he stood as Adonis to Venus or as Virbius to Diana. As to Mefitis see L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Mythologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Berlin, 1881-1883), ii. 144 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. Peter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Mefitis”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 2519 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_617" id="note_617" name="note_617">617.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vii. 563-571, with the commentary of Servius; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De divinatione</span></span>, i. 36. 79; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> ii. 208.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_618" id="note_618" name="note_618">618.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Letter of Mr. Hamilton (British Envoy at the Court of Naples), in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</span></span>, ii. (1832) pp. 62-65; W. Smith's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography</span></span>, i. 127; H. Nissen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Italische Landeskunde</span></span> (Berlin, 1883-1902), i. 242, 271, ii. 819 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Another place in Italy infested by poisonous exhalations is the grotto called <i xml:lang="it">dei cani</i> at Naples. It is described by Addison in his <span class="tei tei-q">“Remarks on Several Parts of Italy”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Works</span></span>, London, 1811, vol. ii. pp. 89-91).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_619" id="note_619" name="note_619">619.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 1. 11, p. 636.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_620" id="note_620" name="note_620">620.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 1. 44, pp. 649 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A coin of Nysa shows the bull carried to the sacrifice by six naked youths and preceded by a naked flute-player. See B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catalogue of the Greek Coins of Lydia</span></span>, pp. lxxxiii. 181, pl. xx. 10. Strabo was familiar with this neighbourhood, for he tells us (xiv. 1. 48, p. 650) that in his youth he studied at Nysa under the philosopher Aristodemus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_621" id="note_621" name="note_621">621.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Some of the ancients assigned Hierapolis to Lydia, and others to Phrygia (W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</span></span>, i. (Oxford, 1895) pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_622" id="note_622" name="note_622">622.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiii. 4. 14, pp. 629 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Dio Cassius, lxviii. 27. 3; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> ii. 208; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 6. 18.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_623" id="note_623" name="note_623">623.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ammianus Marcellinus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) speaks as if the cave no longer existed in his time.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_624" id="note_624" name="note_624">624.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiii. 4. 14, pp. 629, 630; Vitruvius, viii. 3. 10. For modern descriptions of Hierapolis see R. Chandler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Asia Minor</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1776), pp. 228-235; Ch. Fellows, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal written during an Excursion in Asia Minor</span></span> (London, 1839), pp. 283-285; W. J. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Researches in Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia</span></span>, i. 517-521; E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saint Paul</span></span>, pp. 357 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. J. Davis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anatolica</span></span> (London, 1874), pp. 97-112; É. Reclus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</span></span>, ix. 510-512; W. Cochran, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pen and Pencil Sketches in Asia Minor</span></span> (London, 1887), pp. 387-390; W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</span></span>, i. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The temperature of the hot pool varies from 85 to 90 degrees Fahrenheit. The volcanic district of Tuscany which skirts the Apennines abounds in hot calcareous springs which have produced phenomena like those of Hierapolis. Indeed the whole ground is in some places coated over with tufa and travertine, which have been deposited by the water, and, like the ground at Hierapolis, it sounds hollow under the foot. See Sir Ch. Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> i. 397 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the terraces of Rotomahana in New Zealand, which were destroyed by an eruption of Mount Taravera in 1886, see R. Taylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1870), pp. 464-469.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_625" id="note_625" name="note_625">625.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athenaeus, xii. 6. p. 512.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_626" id="note_626" name="note_626">626.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Clouds</span></span>, 1044-1054.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_627" id="note_627" name="note_627">627.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Clouds</span></span>, 1050; Scholiast on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> xii. 25; Suidas and Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἡράκλεια λουτρά; Apostolius, viii. 66; Zenobius, vi. 49; Diogenianus, v. 7; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proverbia Alexandrinorum</span></span>, 21; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 23. 1, v. 3. 4. Another story was that Hercules, like Moses, produced the water by smiting the rock with his club (Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> 4).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_628" id="note_628" name="note_628">628.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apostolius, viii. 68; Zenobius, vi. 49; Diogenianus, v. 7; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proverbia Alexandrinorum</span></span>, 21.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_629" id="note_629" name="note_629">629.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dialogi Deorum</span></span>, 13.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_630" id="note_630" name="note_630">630.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, ix. 4. 13, p. 428.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_631" id="note_631" name="note_631">631.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, vii. 176; Pausanias, iv. 35. 9; Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vit. Sophist.</span></span> ii. 1. 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_632" id="note_632" name="note_632">632.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Clouds</span></span>, 1050.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_633" id="note_633" name="note_633">633.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I have described Thermopylae as I saw it in November 1895. Compare W. M. Leake, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Northern Greece</span></span> (London, 1835), ii. 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; E. Dodwell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical and Topographical Tour through Greece</span></span> (London, 1819), ii. 66 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. G. Fiedler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reise durch alle Theile des Königreichs Griechenland</span></span> (Leipsic, 1840-1841), i. 207 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; L. Ross, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wanderungen in Griechenland</span></span> (Halle, 1851), i. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; C. Bursian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geographie von Griechenland</span></span> (Leipsic, 1862-1872), i. 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_634" id="note_634" name="note_634">634.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Thucydides, iii. 87 and 89; Strabo, i. 3. 20, pp. 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</span></span>, pp. 321-323.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_635" id="note_635" name="note_635">635.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aristotle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Meteora</span></span>, ii. 8, p. 366 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>, ed. Bekker; Strabo, ix. 4. 2, p. 425. Aristotle expressly recognized the connexion of the springs with earthquakes, which he tells us were very common in this district. As to the earthquakes of Euboea see also Thucydides, iii. 87, 89; Strabo, i. 3. 16 and 20, pp. 58, 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_636" id="note_636" name="note_636">636.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sulla</span></span>, 26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_637" id="note_637" name="note_637">637.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaest. Conviviales</span></span>, iv. 4. 1; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De fraterno Amore</span></span>, 17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_638" id="note_638" name="note_638">638.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the hot springs of Aedepsus (the modern <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lipso</span></span>) see K. G. Fiedler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reise durch alle Theile des Königreichs Griechenland</span></span>, i. 487-492; H. N. Ulrichs, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen und Forschungen in Griechenland</span></span> (Bremen, 1840—Berlin, 1863), ii. 233-235; C. Bursian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geographie von Griechenland</span></span>, ii. 409; C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</span></span>, pp. 342-344.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_639" id="note_639" name="note_639">639.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, i. 3. 20, p. 60.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_640" id="note_640" name="note_640">640.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athenaeus, iii. 4, p. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">e</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_641" id="note_641" name="note_641">641.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The hot springs of Himera (the modern <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Termini</span></span>) were said to have been produced for the refreshment of the weary Hercules. See Diodorus Siculus, iv. 23. 1, v. 3. 4; Scholiast on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> xii. 25. The hero is said to have taught the Syracusans to sacrifice a bull annually to Persephone at the Blue Spring (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Cyane</span></span>) near Syracuse; the beasts were drowned in the water of the pool. See Diodorus Siculus, iv. 23. 4, v. 4. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the spring, which is now thickly surrounded by tall papyrus-plants introduced by the Arabs, see K. Baedeker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Southern Italy</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">7</span></span> (Leipsic, 1880), pp. 356, 357.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_642" id="note_642" name="note_642">642.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The splendid baths of Allifae in Samnium, of which there are considerable remains, were sacred to Hercules. See G. Wilmanns, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span> (Berlin, 1873), vol. i. p. 227, No. 735 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>; H. Nissen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Italische Landeskunde</span></span>, ii. 798. It is characteristic of the volcanic nature of the springs that the same inscription which mentions these baths of Hercules records their destruction by an earthquake.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_643" id="note_643" name="note_643">643.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, vol. ii. Pars i. (Berlin, 1902) p. 113, No. 3891.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_644" id="note_644" name="note_644">644.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Speaking of thermal springs Lyell observes that the description of them <span class="tei tei-q">“might almost with equal propriety have been given under the head of <span class="tei tei-q">‘igneous causes,’</span> as they are agents of a mixed nature, being at once igneous and aqueous”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> i. 392).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_645" id="note_645" name="note_645">645.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg194">194</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_646" id="note_646" name="note_646">646.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</span></span> (Chicago, New York, and Toronto, 1902), pp. 116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Mrs. H. H. Spoer, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Powers of Evil in Jerusalem,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xviii. (1907) p. 55. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg078">78</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_647" id="note_647" name="note_647">647.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Jud.</span></span> xvii. 6. 5. The medical properties of the spring are mentioned by Pliny (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> v. 72).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_648" id="note_648" name="note_648">648.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. L. Irby and J. Mangles, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Egypt and Nubia, Syria and the Holy Land</span></span> (London, 1844), pp. 144 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography</span></span> (London, 1873), i. 482, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Callirrhoë”</span>; K. Baedeker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Syria and Palestine</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), p. 148; H. B. Tristram, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of Moab</span></span> (London, 1873), pp. 233-250, 285 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Jacob E. Spafford, <span class="tei tei-q">“Around the Dead Sea by Motor Boat,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Geographical Journal</span></span>, xxxix. (1912) pp. 39 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The river formed by the springs is now called the Zerka.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_649" id="note_649" name="note_649">649.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Antonin Jaussen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes des Arabes au pays de Moab</span></span> (Paris, 1908), pp. 359 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The Arabs think that the evil spirits let the hot water out of hell, lest its healing properties should assuage the pains of the damned. See H. B. Tristram, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of Moab</span></span> (London, 1873), p. 247.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_650" id="note_650" name="note_650">650.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Polynesian Researches</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1832-1836), iv. 235 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Mr. Ellis was the first European to visit and describe the tremendous volcano. His visit was paid in the year 1823. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">9</span></span> xi. 531.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_651" id="note_651" name="note_651">651.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 246 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_652" id="note_652" name="note_652">652.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 248-250.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_653" id="note_653" name="note_653">653.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 207, 234-236. The berries resemble currants in shape and size and grow on low bushes. <span class="tei tei-q">“The branches small and clear, leaves alternate, obtuse with a point, and serrated; the flower was monopetalous, and, on being examined, determined the plant to belong to the class <i xml:lang="la">decandria</i> and order <i xml:lang="la">monogynia</i>. The native name of the plant is <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">ohelo</span></span>”</span> (W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 234).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_654" id="note_654" name="note_654">654.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 263.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_655" id="note_655" name="note_655">655.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 350.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_656" id="note_656" name="note_656">656.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 309-311.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_657" id="note_657" name="note_657">657.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 361.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_658" id="note_658" name="note_658">658.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fernandez de Oviedo y Valdés, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia General y Natural de las Indias</span></span> (Madrid, 1851-1855), iv. 74.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_659" id="note_659" name="note_659">659.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Het Animisme in den Indischen Archipel</span></span> (The Hague, 1906), pp. 497 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_660" id="note_660" name="note_660">660.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. B. d'Almeida, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in Java</span></span> (London, 1864), i. 166-173.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_661" id="note_661" name="note_661">661.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Tĕnggĕresen, ein alter Javanischer Volksstamm,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragentot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, liii. (1901) pp. 84, 144-147.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_662" id="note_662" name="note_662">662.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 100 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_663" id="note_663" name="note_663">663.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I. A. Stigand, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Volcano of Smeroe, Java,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Geographical Journal</span></span>, xxviii. (1906) pp. 621, 624.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_664" id="note_664" name="note_664">664.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 23. 9. Some have thought that Pausanias confused the crater of Etna with the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Lago di Naftia</span></span>, a pool near Palagonia in the interior of Sicily, of which the water, impregnated with naphtha and sulphur, is thrown into violent ebullition by jets of volcanic gas. See [Aristotle,] <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mirab. Auscult.</span></span> 57; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> v. 19. 26 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, xi. 89; Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Παλική; E. H. Bunbury, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Palicorum Iacus,”</span> in W. Smith's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography</span></span>, ii. 533 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The author of the ancient Latin poem <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aetna</span></span> says (vv. 340 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) that people offered incense to the celestial deities on the top of Etna.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_665" id="note_665" name="note_665">665.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg190">190</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_666" id="note_666" name="note_666">666.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On Mount Chimaera in Lycia a flame burned perpetually which neither earth nor water could extinguish. See Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> ii. 236, v. 100; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 288; Seneca, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist.</span></span> x. 3. 3; Diodorus, quoted by Photius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, p. 212 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>, 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ed. Im. Bekker (Berlin, 1824). This perpetual flame was rediscovered by Captain Beaufort near Porto Genovese on the coast of Lycia. It issues from the side of a hill of crumbly serpentine rock, giving out an intense heat, but no smoke. <span class="tei tei-q">“Trees, brushwood, and weeds grow close round this little crater, a small stream trickles down the hill hard bye, and the ground does not appear to feel the effect of its heat at more than a few feet distance.”</span> The fire is not accompanied by earthquakes or noises; it ejects no stones and emits no noxious vapours. There is nothing but a brilliant and perpetual flame, at which the shepherds often cook their food. See Fr. Beaufort, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Karmania</span></span> (London, 1817), p. 46; compare T. A. B. Spratt and E. Forbes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Lycia</span></span> (London, 1847), ii. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_667" id="note_667" name="note_667">667.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In the foregoing discussion I have confined myself, so far as concerns Asia, to the volcanic regions of Cappadocia, Lydia, and Caria. But Syria and Palestine, the home of Adonis and Melcarth, <span class="tei tei-q">“abound in volcanic appearances, and very extensive areas have been shaken, at different periods, with great destruction of cities and loss of lives. Continual mention is made in history of the ravages committed by earthquakes in Sidon, Tyre, Berytus, Laodicea, and Antioch, and in the island of Cyprus. The country around the Dead Sea exhibits in some spots layers of sulphur and bitumen, forming a superficial deposit, supposed by Mr. Tristram to be of volcanic origin”</span> (Sir Ch. Lyell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Principles of Geology</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">12</span></span> i. 592 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). As to the earthquakes of Syria and Phoenicia see Strabo, i. 3. 16, p. 58; Lucretius, vi. 585; Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Jud.</span></span> xv. 5. 2; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bell. Jud.</span></span> i. 19. 3; W. M. Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land and the Book, Central Palestine and Phoenicia</span></span>, pp. 568-574; Ed. Robinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Biblical Researches in Palestine</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> ii. 422-424; S. R. Driver, on Amos iv. 11 (Cambridge <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bible for Schools and Colleges</span></span>). It is said that in the reign of the Emperor Justin the city of Antioch was totally destroyed by a dreadful earthquake, in which three hundred thousand people perished (Procopius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Bello Persico</span></span>, ii. 14). The destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah (Genesis xix. 24-28) has been plausibly explained as the effect of an earthquake liberating large quantities of petroleum and inflammable gases. See H. B. Tristram, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of Israel</span></span>, Fourth Edition (London, 1882), pp. 350-354; S. R. Driver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Book of Genesis</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (London, 1905), pp. 202 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_668" id="note_668" name="note_668">668.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alcibiades</span></span>, 18; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nicias</span></span>, 13; Zenobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Centur.</span></span> i. 49; Theocritus, xv. 132 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Od.</span></span> xi. 590.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_669" id="note_669" name="note_669">669.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Besides Lucian (cited below) see Origen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Selecta in Ezechielem</span></span> (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xiii. 800), δοκοῦσι γὰρ κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν τελετάς τινας ποιεῖν πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι θρηνοῦσιν αὐτὸν [scil. Ἄδωνιν] ὡς τεθνηκότα, δεύτερον δὲ ὅτι χαίρουσιν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ ὡς ἀπὸ νεκρῶν ἀναστάντι. Jerome, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentar. in Ezechielem</span></span>, viii. 13, 14 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xxv. 82, 83): <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Quem nos</i> Adonidem <i xml:lang="la">interpretati sumus, et Hebraeus et Syrus sermo</i> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">Thamuz</span></span> (תמוז) <i xml:lang="la">vocat: unde quia juxta gentilem fabulam, in mense Junis amasius Veneris et pulcherrimus juvenis occisus, et deinceps revixisse narratur, eundem Junium mensem eodem appellant nomine, et anniversariam ei celebrant solemnitatem, in qua plangitur a mulieribus quasi mortuus, et postea reviviscens canitur atque laudatur ... interfectionem et resurrectionem Adonidis planctu et gaudio prosequens.</i>”</span> Cyril of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Isaiam</span></span>, lib. ii. tomus iii. (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, lxx. 441), ἐπλάττοντο τοίνυν Ἔλληνες ἑορτὴν ἐπὶ τούτῳ τοιαύτην. Προσεποιοῦντο μὲν γὰρ λυπουμένῃ τῇ Ἀφροδίτῃ, διὰ τὸ τεθνάναι τὸν Ἄδωνιν, συνολοφύρεσθαι καὶ θρηνεῖν; ἀνελθούσης δὲ ἐξ ᾅδου, καὶ μὴν καὶ ηὐρῆσθαι λεγούσης τὸν ζητούμενον, συνήδεσθαι καὶ ἀνασκιρτᾶν; καὶ μεχρὶ τῶν καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς καιρῶν ἐν τοῖς κατ᾽ Ἀλεξάνδρειαν ἱεροῖς ἐτελεῖτο τὸ παίγνιον τοῦτο. From this testimony of Cyril we learn that the festival of the death and resurrection of Adonis was celebrated at Alexandria down to his time, that is, down to the fourth or even the fifth century, long after the official establishment of Christianity.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_670" id="note_670" name="note_670">670.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Theocritus, xv.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_671" id="note_671" name="note_671">671.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span> (Berlin, 1877), p. 277.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_672" id="note_672" name="note_672">672.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 6. See above, p. 38. The flutes used by the Phoenicians in the lament for Adonis are mentioned by Athenaeus (iv. 76, p. 174 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">f</span></span>), and by Pollux (iv. 76), who say that the same name <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">gingras</span></span> was applied by the Phoenicians both to the flute and to Adonis himself. Compare F. C. Movers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Phoenizier</span></span>, i. 243 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> We have seen that flutes were also played in the Babylonian rites of Tammuz (above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg009">9</a>). Lucian's words, ἐς τὸν ἠέρα πέμπουσι, imply that the ascension of the god was supposed to take place in the presence, if not before the eyes, of the worshipping crowds. The devotion of Byblus to Adonis is noticed also by Strabo (xvi. 2. 18, p. 755).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_673" id="note_673" name="note_673">673.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 8. The discoloration of the river and the sea was observed by H. Maundrell on 17/27 March 1696/1697. See his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem, at Easter,</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> <span style="font-style: italic">1697</span></span>, Fourth Edition (Perth, 1800), pp. 59 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in Bohn's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Early Travels in Palestine</span></span>, edited by Thomas Wright (London, 1848), pp. 411 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Renan remarked the discoloration at the beginning of February (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span>, p. 283). In his well-known lines on the subject Milton has laid the mourning in summer:—</p>
							<p>
								<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Thammuz came next behind,</span><br/>
								<span style="font-style: italic">Whose annual wound in Lebanon allur'd</span><br/>
								<span style="font-style: italic">The Syrian damsels to lament his fate</span><br/>
								<span style="font-style: italic">In amorous ditties all a summer's day.</span></span>”</span>
							</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_674" id="note_674" name="note_674">674.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 735; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> v. 72; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 831. Bion, on the other hand, represents the anemone as sprung from the tears of Aphrodite (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Idyl.</span></span> i. 66).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_675" id="note_675" name="note_675">675.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ctesias and the Semiramis Legend,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">English Historical Review</span></span>, ii. (1887) p. 307, following Lagarde. Compare W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_676" id="note_676" name="note_676">676.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 831; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geoponica</span></span>, xi. 17; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythographi Graeci</span></span>, ed. A. Westermann, p. 359. Compare Bion, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Idyl.</span></span> i. 66; Pausanias, vi. 24. 7; Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist.</span></span> i. and iii.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_677" id="note_677" name="note_677">677.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alcibiades</span></span>, 18; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nicias</span></span>, 13. The date of the sailing of the fleet is given by Thucydides (vi. 30, θέρους μεσοῦντος ἤδη), who, with his habitual contempt for the superstition of his countrymen, disdains to notice the coincidence. Adonis was also bewailed by the Argive women (Pausanias, ii. 20. 6), but we do not know at what season of the year the lamentation took place. Inscriptions prove that processions in honour of Adonis were held in the Piraeus, and that a society of his worshippers existed at Loryma in Caria. See G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Nos. 726, 741 (vol. ii. pp. 564, 604).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_678" id="note_678" name="note_678">678.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 9. 15.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_679" id="note_679" name="note_679">679.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 261-266.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_680" id="note_680" name="note_680">680.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In the Alexandrian ceremony, however, it appears to have been the image of Adonis only which was thrown into the sea.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_681" id="note_681" name="note_681">681.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 14. 4; Scholiast on Theocritus, i. 109; Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> 34; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scholia on Lycophron</span></span>, 829; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metamorph.</span></span> x. 489 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> v. 72, and on <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bucol.</span></span> x. 18; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 58, 164; Fulgentius, iii. 8. The word Myrrha or Smyrna is borrowed from the Phoenician (Liddell and Scott, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Greek Lexicon</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> σμύρνα). Hence the mother's name, as well as the son's, was taken directly from the Semites.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_682" id="note_682" name="note_682">682.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, p. 383, note 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_683" id="note_683" name="note_683">683.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg009">9</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_684" id="note_684" name="note_684">684.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jeremiah xliv. 17-19.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_685" id="note_685" name="note_685">685.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Theocritus, iii. 48; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Astronom.</span></span> ii. 7; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dialog. deor.</span></span> xi. 1; Cornutus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theologiae Graecae Compendium</span></span>, 28, p. 54, ed. C. Lang (Leipsic, 1881); Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, iii. 14. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_686" id="note_686" name="note_686">686.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The arguments which tell against the solar interpretation of Adonis are stated more fully by the learned and candid scholar Graf Baudissin (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), who himself formerly accepted the solar theory but afterwards rightly rejected it in favour of the view <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="de">dass Adonis die Frühlingsvegetation darstellt, die im Sommer abstirbt</i>”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 169).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_687" id="note_687" name="note_687">687.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bailly, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres sur l'Origine des Sciences</span></span> (London and Paris, 1777), pp. 255 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres sur l'Atlantide de Platon</span></span> (London and Paris, 1779), pp. 114-125. Carlyle has described how through the sleety drizzle of a dreary November day poor innocent Bailly was dragged to the scaffold amid the howls and curses of the Parisian mob (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">French Revolution</span></span>, bk. v. ch. 2). My friend the late Professor C. Bendall showed me a book by a Hindoo gentleman in which it is seriously maintained that the primitive home of the Aryans was within the Arctic regions. See Bâl Gangâdhar Tilak, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Arctic Home in the Vedas</span></span> (Poona and Bombay, 1903).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_688" id="note_688" name="note_688">688.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cornutus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theologiae Graecae Compendium</span></span>, 28, pp. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ed. C. Lang (Leipsic, 1881), τοιοῦτον γάρ τι καὶ παρ᾽ Αἰγυπτίοις ὁ ζητούμενος καὶ ἀνευρισκόμενος ὑπὸ τῆς Ἴσιδος Ὄσιρις ἐμφαίνει καὶ παρὰ Φοίνιξιν ὁ ἀνὰ μέρος παρ᾽ ἔξ μῆνας ὑπὲρ γῆν τε καὶ ὑπὸ γῆν γινόμενος Ἄδωνις, ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀδεῖν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις οὔτως ὠνομασμένου τοῦ Δημητριακοῦ καρποῦ. τοῦτον δὲ πλήξας κάπρος ἀνελεῖν λέγεται διὰ τὸ τὰς ὗς δοκεῖν ληιβότειρας εἶναι ἢ τὸν τῆς ὕνεως ὀδόντα αἰνιττομένων αὐτῶν, ὑφ᾽ οὖ κατὰ γῆς κρύπτεται τὸ σπέρμα. Scholiast on Theocritus, iii. 48, ὁ Ἄδωνις, ἤγουν ὁ σῖτος ὁ σπειρόμενος, ἔξ μῆνας ἐν τῇ γῇ ποιεῖ ἀπο τῆς σπορᾶς καὶ ἔξ μῆνας ἔχει αὐτὸν ἡ Ἀφροδίτη, τουτέστιν ἡ εὐκρασία τοῦ ἀέρος. καὶ ἐκτότε λαμβάνουσιν αὐτὸν οἱ ἄνθρωποι. Origen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Selecta in Ezechielem</span></span> (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xiii. 800), οἱ δὲ περὶ τὴν ἀναγωγὴν τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν μύθων δεινοὶ καὶ μυθικῆς νομιζομένης θεολογίας, φασί τὸν Ἄδωνιν σύμβολον εἶναι τῶν τῆς γῆς καρπῶν, θρηνουμένων μὲν ὅτε σπείρονται, ἀνισταμένων δέ, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο χαίρειν ποιούντων τοὺς γεωργοὺς ὅτε φύονται. Jerome, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentar. in Ezechielem</span></span>, viii. 13, 14 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xxv. 83), <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Eadem gentilitas hujuscemodi fabulas poetarum, quae habent turpitudinem, interpretatur subtiliter, interfectionem et resurrectionem Adonidis planctu et gaudio prosequens: quorum alterum in seminibus, quae moriuntur in terra, alterum in segetibus, quibus mortua semina renascuntur, ostendi putat.</i>”</span> Ammianus Marcellinus, xix. 1. 11, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">in sollemnibus Adonidis sacris, quod simulacrum aliquod esse frugum adultarum religiones mysticae docent</i>.”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Id.</span></span> xxii. 9. 15, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">amato Veneris, ut fabulae fingunt, apri dente ferali deleto, quod in adulto flore sectarum est indicium frugum</i>.”</span> Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hom.</span></span> 6. 11 (quoted by W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antique Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, p. 281), λαμβάνουσι δὲ καὶ Ἄδωνιν εἰς ὡραίους καρπούς. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymologieum Magnum</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἄδωνις κύριον; δύναται καὶ ὁ καρπὸς εἶναι ἄδωνις; οἶον ἀδώνειος καρπός, ἀρέσκων. Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praepar. Evang.</span></span> iii. II. 9, Ἄδωνις τῆς τῶν τελείων καρπῶν ἐκτομῆς σύμβολον. Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 32, οἱ Αἰγύπτιοι ... αὐτὰ τὰ σώματα θεοὺς νομίσαντες ... Ἴσιν μὲν τὴν γῆν ... Ἄδωνιν δὲ καρπούς. Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mensibus</span></span>, iv. 4, τῷ Ἀδώνιδι, τουτέστι τῷ Μαΐῳ ... ἢ ὡς ἄλλοις, δοκεῖ, Ἄδωνις μέν ἐστιν ὁ καρπός, κτλ. The view that Tammuz or Adonis is a personification of the dying and reviving vegetation is now accepted by many scholars. See P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kosmologie der Babylonier</span></span> (Strasburg, 1890), p. 480; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und Epen</span></span>, pp. 411, 560; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 397; A. Jeremias, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Nergal,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, iii. 265; R. Wünsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Frühlingsfest der Insel Malta</span></span> (Leipsic, 1902), p. 21; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 306 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Tammuz,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Realencyclopädie für protestantische Theologie und Kirchengeschichte</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esmun und Adonis</span></span>, pp. 81, 141, 169, etc.; and Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 2. pp. 394, 427. Prof. Jastrow regards Tammuz as a god both of the sun and of vegetation (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 547, 564, 574, 588). But such a combination of disparate qualities seems artificial and unlikely.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_689" id="note_689" name="note_689">689.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. Chwolsohn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1856), ii. 27; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ueber Tammûz und die Menschenverehrung bei den alten Babylioniern</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1860), p. 38. Compare W. W. Graf Baudissin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 111 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_690" id="note_690" name="note_690">690.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les Religions Sémitiques</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1905), pp. 307 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_691" id="note_691" name="note_691">691.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hence Philo of Alexandria dates the corn-reaping in the middle of spring (Μεσοῦντος δὲ ἔαρος ἄμητος ἐνίσταται, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De special. legibus</span></span>, i. 183, vol. v. p. 44, ed. L. Cohn). On this subject Professor W. M. Flinders Petrie writes to me: <span class="tei tei-q">“The Coptic calendar puts on April 2 beginning of wheat harvest in Upper Egypt, May 2 wheat harvest, Lower Egypt. Barley is two or three weeks earlier than wheat in Palestine, but probably less in Egypt. The Palestine harvest is about the time of that in North Egypt.”</span> With regard to Palestine we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“the harvest begins with the barley in April; in the valley of the Jordan it begins at the end of March. Between the end of the barley harvest and the beginning of the wheat harvest an interval of two or three weeks elapses. Thus as a rule the business of harvest lasts about seven weeks”</span> (J. Benzinger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hebräische Archäologie</span></span>, Freiburg i. B. and Leipsic, 1894, p. 209). <span class="tei tei-q">“The principal grain crops of Palestine are barley, wheat, lentils, maize, and millet. Of the latter there is very little, and it is all gathered in by the end of May. The maize is then only just beginning to shoot. In the hotter parts of the Jordan valley the barley harvest is over by the end of March, and throughout the country the wheat harvest is at its height at the end of May, excepting in the highlands of Galilee, where it is about a fortnight later”</span> (H. B. Tristram, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of Israel</span></span>, Fourth Edition, London, 1882, pp. 583 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). As to Greece, Professor E. A. Gardner tells me that harvest is from April to May in the plains and about a month later in the mountains. He adds that <span class="tei tei-q">“barley may, then, be assigned to the latter part of April, wheat to May in the lower ground, but you know the great difference of climate between different parts; there is the same difference of a month in the vintage.”</span> Mrs. Hawes (Miss Boyd), who excavated at Gournia, tells me that in Crete the barley is cut in April and the beginning of May, and that the wheat is cut and threshed from about the twentieth of June, though the dates naturally vary somewhat with the height of the place above the sea. June is also the season when the wheat is threshed in Euboea (R. A. Arnold, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">From the Levant</span></span>, London, 1868, i. 250). Thus it seems possible that the spring festival of Adonis coincided with the cutting of the first barley in March, and his summer festival with the threshing of the last wheat in June. Father Lagrange (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 305 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) argues that the rites of Adonis were always celebrated in summer at the solstice of June or soon afterwards. Baudissin also holds that the summer celebration is the only one which is clearly attested, and that if there was a celebration in spring it must have had a different signification than the death of the god. See his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis und Esmun</span></span>, pp. 132 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_692" id="note_692" name="note_692">692.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, i. 14. 2. See below, vol. ii. pp. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_693" id="note_693" name="note_693">693.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 204 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_694" id="note_694" name="note_694">694.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologische Forschungen</span></span> (Strasburg, 1884), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 216 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_695" id="note_695" name="note_695">695.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. B. Macaulay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of England</span></span>, chapter xx. vol. iv. (London, 1855) p. 410.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_696" id="note_696" name="note_696">696.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This explanation of the name <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthesteria</span></span>, as applied to a festival of the dead, is due to Mr. R. Wünsch (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Frühlingsfest der Insel Malta</span></span>, Leipsic, 1902, pp. 43 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). I cannot accept the late Dr. A. W. Verrall's ingenious derivation of the word from a verb ἀναθέσσασθαι in the sense of <span class="tei tei-q">“to conjure up”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“The Name Anthesteria,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xx. (1900) pp. 115-117). As to the festival see E. Rohde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903), i. 236 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Miss J. E. Harrison, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Cambridge, 1908), pp. 32 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In Annam people offer food to their dead on the graves when the earth begins to grow green in spring. The ceremony takes place on the third day of the third month, the sun then entering the sign of Taurus. See Paul Giran, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magie et Religion Annamites</span></span> (Paris, 1912), pp. 423 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_697" id="note_697" name="note_697">697.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mission de Phénicie</span></span> (Paris, 1864), p. 216.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_698" id="note_698" name="note_698">698.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For the authorities see Raoul Rochette, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mémoire sur les jardins d'Adonis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue Archéologique</span></span>, viii. (1851) pp. 97-123; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, p. 279, note 2, and p. 280, note 2. To the authorities cited by Mannhardt add Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist. Plant.</span></span> vi. 7. 3; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Causis Plant.</span></span> i. 12. 2; Gregorius Cyprius, i. 7; Macarius, i. 63; Apostolius, i. 34; Diogenianus, i. 14; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De sera num. vind.</span></span> 17. Women only are mentioned as planting the gardens of Adonis by Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Convivium</span></span>, p. 329 ed. Spanheim (p. 423 ed. Hertlein); Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Od.</span></span> xi. 590. On the other hand, Apostolius and Diogenianus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ll.cc.</span></span>) say φυτεύοντες ἢ φυτεύουσαι. The earliest extant Greek writer who mentions the gardens of Adonis is Plato (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Phaedrus</span></span>, p. 276 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>). The procession at the festival of Adonis is mentioned in an Attic inscription of 302 or 301 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> (G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. ii. p. 564, No. 726). Gardens of Adonis are perhaps alluded to by Isaiah (xvii. 10, with the commentators).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_699" id="note_699" name="note_699">699.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In hot southern countries like Egypt and the Semitic regions of Western Asia, where vegetation depends chiefly or entirely upon irrigation, the purpose of the charm is doubtless to secure a plentiful flow of water in the streams. But as the ultimate object and the charms for securing it are the same in both cases, I have not thought it necessary always to point out the distinction.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_700" id="note_700" name="note_700">700.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 232, 233 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_701" id="note_701" name="note_701">701.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 272 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_702" id="note_702" name="note_702">702.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Baumkultus der Germanen und ihrer Nachbarstämme</span></span> (Berlin, 1875), p. 214; W. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Branch der Romänen Siebenbürgens</span></span> (Hermannstadt, 1866), pp. 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The custom of throwing water on the last wagon-load of corn returning from the harvest-field has been practised within living memory in Wigtownshire, and at Orwell in Cambridgeshire. See J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on Harvest Customs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Journal</span></span>, vii. (1889) pp. 50, 51. (In the first of these passages the Orwell at which the custom used to be observed is said to be in Kent; this was a mistake of mine, which my informant, the Rev. E. B. Birks, formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, afterwards corrected.) Mr. R. F. Davis writes to me (March 4, 1906) from Campbell College, Belfast: <span class="tei tei-q">“Between 30 and 40 years ago I was staying, as a very small boy, at a Nottinghamshire farmhouse at harvest-time, and was allowed—as a great privilege—to ride home on the top of the last load. All the harvesters followed the waggon, and on reaching the farmyard we found the maids of the farm gathered near the gate, with bowls and buckets of water, which they proceeded to throw on the men, who got thoroughly drenched.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_703" id="note_703" name="note_703">703.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. A. Heinrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Agrarische Sitten und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</span></span> (Hermanstadt, 1880), p. 24; H. von Wlislocki, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten und Brauch der Siebenbürger Sachsen</span></span> (Hamburg, 1888), p. 32.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_704" id="note_704" name="note_704">704.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Drosinis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Land und Leute in Nord-Euböa</span></span> (Leipsic, 1884), p. 53.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_705" id="note_705" name="note_705">705.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Matthäus Prätorius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deliciae Prussicae</span></span> (Berlin, 1871), p. 55; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 214 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_706" id="note_706" name="note_706">706.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. Prätorius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 60; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 215, note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_707" id="note_707" name="note_707">707.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Prahn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Glaube und Brauch in der Mark Brandenburg,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, i. (1891) p. 186.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_708" id="note_708" name="note_708">708.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Hartung, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zur Volkskunde aus Anhalt,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, vii. (1897) p. 150.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_709" id="note_709" name="note_709">709.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Kolbe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hessische Volks-Sitten und Gebräuche</span></span> (Marburg, 1888), p. 51.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_710" id="note_710" name="note_710">710.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, ii. (Munich, 1863) p. 297.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_711" id="note_711" name="note_711">711.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. H. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Badisches Volksleben</span></span> (Strasburg, 1900), p. 420.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_712" id="note_712" name="note_712">712.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Walter Fewkes, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Tusayan New Fire Ceremony,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural History</span></span>, xxvi. (1895) p. 446.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_713" id="note_713" name="note_713">713.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan à son évêque,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), Deuxième Série, ii. (1834) pp. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_714" id="note_714" name="note_714">714.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 59 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_715" id="note_715" name="note_715">715.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</span></span> (Calcutta, 1872), p. 259.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_716" id="note_716" name="note_716">716.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 188. As to the influence which trees are supposed to exercise on the crops, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_717" id="note_717" name="note_717">717.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lieut.-Col. James Tod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals and Antiquities of Rajast'han</span></span>, i. (London, 1829) pp. 570-572.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_718" id="note_718" name="note_718">718.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. F. D'Penha, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Collection of Notes on Marriage Customs in the Madras Presidency,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xxv. (1896) p. 144; E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), p. 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_719" id="note_719" name="note_719">719.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Atkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western Provinces of India</span></span>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884) p. 870.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_720" id="note_720" name="note_720">720.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), ii. 293 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Baboo Ishuree Dass, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Domestic Manners and Customs of the Hindoos of Northern India</span></span> (Benares, 1860), pp. 111 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to the latter writer, the festival of Salono [not Salonan] takes place in August, and the barley is planted by women and girls in baskets a few days before the festival, to be thrown by them into a river or tank when the grain has sprouted to the height of a few inches.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_721" id="note_721" name="note_721">721.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mrs. J. C. Murray-Aynsley, <span class="tei tei-q">“Secular and Religious Dances,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore Journal</span></span>, v. (1887) pp. 253 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer thinks that the ceremony <span class="tei tei-q">“probably fixes the season for sowing some particular crop.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_722" id="note_722" name="note_722">722.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency</span></span>, xx. (Bombay, 1884) p. 454. This passage was pointed out to me by my friend Mr. W. Crooke.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_723" id="note_723" name="note_723">723.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency</span></span>, xx. 443, 460.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_724" id="note_724" name="note_724">724.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span> (Munich, 1860-1867), ii. 298.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_725" id="note_725" name="note_725">725.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Antonio Bresciani, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dei costumi dell' isola di Sardegna comparati cogli antichissimi popoli orientali</span></span> (Rome and Turin, 1866), pp. 427 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. Tennant, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sardinia and its Resources</span></span> (Rome and London, 1885), p. 187; S. Gabriele, <span class="tei tei-q">“Usi dei contadini della Sardegna,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradizioni Popolari</span></span>, vii. (1888) pp. 469 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Tennant says that the pots are kept in a dark warm place, and that the children leap across the fire.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_726" id="note_726" name="note_726">726.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e Costumi, Credenze e Pregiudizi del Popolo Siciliano</span></span> (Palermo, 1889), ii. 271-278. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span> (Palermo, 1881), pp. 297 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In the Abruzzi also young men and young women become gossips by exchanging nosegays on St. John's Day, and the tie thus formed is regarded as sacred. See G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_727" id="note_727" name="note_727">727.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Wünsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Frühlingsfest der Insel Malta</span></span>, pp. 47-57.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_728" id="note_728" name="note_728">728.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg010">10</a>, note 1, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg224">224</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg226">226</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_729" id="note_729" name="note_729">729.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 490.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_730" id="note_730" name="note_730">730.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span>, pp. 156-160. A passage in Isaiah (xxvi. 19) seems to imply that dew possessed the magical virtue of restoring the dead to life. In this passage of Isaiah the customs which I have cited in the text perhaps favour the ordinary interpretation of טל אורת as <span class="tei tei-q">“dew of herbs”</span> (compare 2 Kings iv. 39) against the interpretation <span class="tei tei-q">“dew of lights,”</span> which some modern commentators (Dillmann, Skinner, Whitehouse), following Jerome, have adopted.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_731" id="note_731" name="note_731">731.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Feste patronali in Sicilia</span></span> (Turin and Palermo, 1900), pp. 488, 491-493.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_732" id="note_732" name="note_732">732.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span>, p. 307.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_733" id="note_733" name="note_733">733.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Petrarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epistolae de rebus familiaribus</span></span>, i. 4 (vol. i. pp. 44-46 ed. J. Fracassetti, Florence, 1859-1862). The passage is quoted by J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 489 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_734" id="note_734" name="note_734">734.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 489.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_735" id="note_735" name="note_735">735.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Letter of Dr. Otero Acevado, of Madrid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Temps</span></span>, September 1898.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_736" id="note_736" name="note_736">736.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887), ii. 8; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, Mythes et Traditions des provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), p. 150.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_737" id="note_737" name="note_737">737.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 20; Bérenger-Féraud, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Réminiscences populaires de la Provence</span></span> (Paris, 1885), pp. 135-141.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_738" id="note_738" name="note_738">738.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Breuil, <span class="tei tei-q">“Du Culte de St. Jean Baptiste,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaires de Picardie</span></span>, viii. (1845) pp. 237 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, i. 193 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_739" id="note_739" name="note_739">739.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diego Duran, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia de las Indias de Nueva España</span></span>, edited by J. F. Ramirez (Mexico, 1867-1880), ii. 293.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_740" id="note_740" name="note_740">740.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Opera</span></span>, v. (Paris, 1683) col. 903; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, Pars Secunda, coll. 461 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The second of these passages occurs in a sermon of doubtful authenticity. Both have been quoted by J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 490.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_741" id="note_741" name="note_741">741.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Doutté, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magie et Religion dans l'Afrique du Nord</span></span> (Algiers, 1908), pp. 567 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Westermarck, <span class="tei tei-q">“Midsummer Customs in Morocco,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xvi. (1905) pp. 31 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ceremonies and Beliefs connected with Agriculture, Certain Dates of the Solar Year, and the Weather</span></span> (Helsingfors, 1913), pp. 84-86. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, i. 216.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_742" id="note_742" name="note_742">742.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, i. 160 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_743" id="note_743" name="note_743">743.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 65 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_744" id="note_744" name="note_744">744.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, p. 262.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_745" id="note_745" name="note_745">745.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Lloyd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peasant Life in Sweden</span></span> (London, 1870), p. 257.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_746" id="note_746" name="note_746">746.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, i. 328 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_747" id="note_747" name="note_747">747.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 464; K. von Leoprechting, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem Lechrain</span></span> (Munich, 1855), p. 183. For more evidence see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, i. 165, 166, 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 168, 173, 174.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_748" id="note_748" name="note_748">748.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The use of gardens of Adonis to fertilize the human sexes appears plainly in the corresponding Indian practices. See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg241">241</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg242">242</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg243">243</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_749" id="note_749" name="note_749">749.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span>, pp. 296 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_750" id="note_750" name="note_750">750.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 302 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Antonio de Nino, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span> (Florence, 1879-1883), i. 55 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. de Gubernatis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi Nuziali in Italia e presso gli altri Popoli Indo-Europei</span></span> (Milan, 1878), pp. 39 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare L. Passarini, <span class="tei tei-q">“Il Comparatico e la Festa di S. Giovanni nelle Marche e in Roma,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradizioni Popolari</span></span>, i. (1882) p. 135. At Smyrna a blossom of the <i xml:lang="la">Agnus castus</i> is used on St. John's Day for a similar purpose, but the mode in which the omens are drawn is somewhat different. See Teofilo, <span class="tei tei-q">“La notte di San Giovanni in Oriente,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archivio per lo Studio delle Tradizioni Popolari</span></span>, vii. (1888) pp. 128-130.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_751" id="note_751" name="note_751">751.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Matthäus Prätorius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deliciae Prussicae</span></span> (Berlin, 1871), p. 56.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_752" id="note_752" name="note_752">752.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 261 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_753" id="note_753" name="note_753">753.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 233 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 261 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_754" id="note_754" name="note_754">754.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span>, p. 211.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_755" id="note_755" name="note_755">755.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Κήπους ὡσίουν ἐπιταφίους Ἀδώνιδι, Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Od.</span></span> xi. 590.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_756" id="note_756" name="note_756">756.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Vincenzo Dorsa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La tradizione Greco-Latina negli usi e nelle credenze popolari della Calabria Citeriore</span></span> (Cosenza, 1884), p. 50.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_757" id="note_757" name="note_757">757.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Wachsmuth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das alte Griechenland im neuen</span></span> (Bonn, 1864), pp. 26. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer compares these ceremonies with the Eleusinian rites. But I agree with Mr. R. Wünsch (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Frühlingsfest der Insel Malta</span></span>, pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) that the resemblance to the Adonis festival is still closer. Compare V. Dorsa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La tradizione Greco-Latina negli usi e nelle credenze popolari della Calabria Citeriore</span></span>, pp. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Prof. Wachsmuth's description seems to apply to Athens. In the country districts the ritual is apparently similar. See R. A. Arnold, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">From the Levant</span></span> (London, 1868), pp. 251 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 259 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> So in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem the death and burial of Christ are acted over a life-like effigy. See Henry Maundrell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem at Easter,</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic; font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span><span style="font-style: italic">1697</span></span>, Fourth Edition (Perth, 1800), pp. 110 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in Th. Wright's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Early Travels in Palestine</span></span> (London, 1848), pp. 443-445.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_758" id="note_758" name="note_758">758.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e Feste Popolari Siciliane</span></span>, pp. 217 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_759" id="note_759" name="note_759">759.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span>, pp. 118-120; A. de Nino, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</span></span>, i. 64 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ii. 210-212. At Roccacaramanico part of the Easter spectacle is the death of Judas, who, personated by a living man, pretends to hang himself upon a tree or a great branch, which has been brought into the church and planted near the high altar for the purpose (A. de Nino, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 211).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_760" id="note_760" name="note_760">760.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The drama of the death and resurrection of Christ was formerly celebrated at Easter in England. See Abbot Gasquet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Parish Life in Mediaeval England</span></span>, pp. 177 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 182 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_761" id="note_761" name="note_761">761.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The comparison has already been made by A. Maury, who also compares the Easter ceremonies of the Catholic Church with the rites of Adonis (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des Religions de la Grèce Antique</span></span>, Paris, 1857-1859, vol. iii. p. 221).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_762" id="note_762" name="note_762">762.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jerome, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epist.</span></span> lviii. 3 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xxii. 581).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_763" id="note_763" name="note_763">763.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bethlehem is בית-לחם, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“House of Bread.”</span> The name is appropriate, for <span class="tei tei-q">“the immediate neighbourhood is very fertile, bearing, besides wheat and barley, groves of olive and almond, and vineyards. The wine of Bethlehem (<span class="tei tei-q">‘Talhamī’</span>) is among the best of Palestine. So great fertility must mean that the site was occupied, in spite of the want of springs, from the earliest times”</span> (George Adam Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Bethlehem,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, i. 560). It was in the harvest-fields of Bethlehem that Ruth, at least in the poet's fancy, listened to the nightingale <span class="tei tei-q">“amid the alien corn.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_764" id="note_764" name="note_764">764.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John vi. 35.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_765" id="note_765" name="note_765">765.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg227">227</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_766" id="note_766" name="note_766">766.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 9. 14, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Urbique propinquans in speciem alicujus numinis votis excipitur publicis, miratus voces multitudinis magnae, salutare sidus inluxisse eois partibus adclamantis.</i>”</span> We may compare the greeting which a tribe of South American Indians used to give to a worshipful star after its temporary disappearance. <span class="tei tei-q">“The Abipones think that the Pleiades, composed of seven stars, is an image of their ancestor. As the constellation is invisible for some months in the sky of South America, they believe that their ancestor is ill, and every year they are mortally afraid that he will die. But when the said stars reappear in the month of May, they imagine that their ancestor is recovered from his sickness and has returned; so they hail him with joyous shouts and the glad music of pipes and war-horns. They congratulate him on his recovery. <span class="tei tei-q">‘How we thank you! At last you have come back? Oh, have you happily recovered?’</span> With such cries they fill the air, attesting at once their gladness and their folly.”</span> See M. Dobrizhoffer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia de Abiponibus</span></span> (Vienna, 1784), ii. 77.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_767" id="note_767" name="note_767">767.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 370 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 424.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_768" id="note_768" name="note_768">768.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sozomenus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, ii. 5 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, lxvii. 948). The connexion of the meteor with the festival of Adonis is not mentioned by Sozomenus, but is confirmed by Zosimus, who says (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hist.</span></span> i. 58) that a light like a torch or a globe of fire was seen on the sanctuary at the seasons when the people assembled to worship the goddess and to cast their offerings of gold, silver, and fine raiment into a lake beside the temple. As to Aphaca and the grave of Adonis see above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg028">28</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_769" id="note_769" name="note_769">769.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Matthew ii. 1-12.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_770" id="note_770" name="note_770">770.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, iii. 59. 7; Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> iv., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33; Scholiast on Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexipharmaca</span></span>, 8; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 3 and 22. The ancient evidence, literary and inscriptional, as to the myth and ritual of Attis has been collected and discussed by Mr. H. Hepding in his monograph, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis, seine Mythen und sein Kult</span></span> (Giessen, 1903).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_771" id="note_771" name="note_771">771.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refutatio omnium haeresium</span></span>, v. 9, p. 168 ed. L. Duncker and F. G. Schneidewin (Göttingen, 1859); Socrates, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, iii. 23. 51 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_772" id="note_772" name="note_772">772.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iv. 223 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apologeticus</span></span>, 15; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ad Nationes</span></span>, i. 10; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, iv. 35. As to Cybele, the Great Mother, the Mother of the Gods, conceived as the source of all life, both animal and vegetable, see Rapp, in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kybele,”</span> ii. 1638 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_773" id="note_773" name="note_773">773.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jupiter Tragoedus</span></span>, 8, p. 60 ed. H. Rabe (Leipsic, 1906), (vol. iv. p. 173 ed. C. Jacobitz); Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refutatio omnium haeresium</span></span>, v. 9, pp. 168, 170 ed. Duncker and Schneidewin.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_774" id="note_774" name="note_774">774.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, vii. 17. 11; Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refutatio omnium haeresium</span></span>, v. 9, pp. 166, 168 ed. Duncker and Schneidewin; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_775" id="note_775" name="note_775">775.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg099">99</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_776" id="note_776" name="note_776">776.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. I. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</span></span>, pp. 115 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> See above, pp. 78, 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_777" id="note_777" name="note_777">777.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">That Attis was killed by a boar was stated by Hermesianax, an elegiac poet of the fourth century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> (Pausanias, vii. 17); compare Scholiast on Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexipharmaca</span></span>, 8. The other story is told by Arnobius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) on the authority of Timotheus, who professed to derive it from recondite antiquarian works and from the very heart of the mysteries. It is obviously identical with the account which Pausanias (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>) mentions as the story current in Pessinus. According to Servius (on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> ix. 115), Attis was found bleeding to death under a pine-tree, but the wound which robbed him of his virility and his life was not inflicted by himself. The Timotheus cited by Pausanias may be the Timotheus who was consulted by Ptolemy Soter on religious matters and helped to establish the worship of Serapis. See Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isis et Osiris</span></span>, 28; Franz Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1909), pp. 77, 113, 335.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_778" id="note_778" name="note_778">778.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, vii. 17. 10; Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orat.</span></span> v. 177 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>, p. 229, ed. F. C. Hertlein (Leipsic, 1875-1876). Similarly at Comana in Pontus, the seat of the worship of the goddess Ma, pork was not eaten, and swine might not even be brought into the city (Strabo, xii. 8. 9, p. 575). As to Comana see above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg039">39</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_779" id="note_779" name="note_779">779.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. Sophronius, <span class="tei tei-q">“SS. Cyri et Joannis Miracula,”</span> Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, lxxxvii. Pars Tertia, col. 3624, πρὸς πλάνην Ἑλληνικὴν ἀποκλίνουσαν [<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">scil.</span></span> τὴν Ἰουλίαν] καὶ ταύτῃ διὰ τὸν Ἀδώνιδος Θάνατον τὰ κρέα παραιτεῖσθαι τὰ ὕεια.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_780" id="note_780" name="note_780">780.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 103 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_781" id="note_781" name="note_781">781.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxix. chs. 10, 11, and 14; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iv. 259 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Herodian, ii. 11. As to the stone which represented the goddess see Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, vii. 49.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_782" id="note_782" name="note_782">782.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xviii. 16.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_783" id="note_783" name="note_783">783.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucretius, ii. 598 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Catullus, lxiii.; Varro, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Satir. Menipp.</span></span>, ed. F. Bücheler (Berlin, 1882), pp. 176, 178; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iv. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 223 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 361 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Rom.</span></span> ii. 19, compare Polybius, xxii. 18 ed. L. Dindorf (Leipsic, 1866-1868).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_784" id="note_784" name="note_784">784.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mensibus</span></span>, iv. 41. See Robinson Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentary on Catullus</span></span> (Oxford, 1876), pp. 206 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 142 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1909), pp. 83 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></p>
							<p>It is held by Prof. A. von Domaszewski that the Claudius who incorporated the Phrygian worship of the sacred tree in the Roman ritual was not the emperor of the first century but the emperor of the third century, Claudius Gothicus, who came to the throne in 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> See A. von Domaszewski, <span class="tei tei-q">“Magna Mater in Latin Inscriptions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Journal of Roman Studies</span></span>, i. (1911) p. 56. The later date, it is said, fits better with the slow development of the worship. But on the other hand this view is open to certain objections. (1) Joannes Lydus, our only authority on the point, appears to identify the Claudius in question with the emperor of the first century. (2) The great and widespread popularity of the Phrygian worship in the Roman empire long before 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> is amply attested by an array of ancient writers and inscriptions, especially by a great series of inscriptions referring to the colleges of Tree-bearers (<i xml:lang="la">Dendrophori</i>), from which we learn that one of these colleges, devoted to the worship of Cybele and Attis, existed at Rome in the age of the Antonines, about a century before the accession of Claudius Gothicus. (3) Passages of the Augustan historians (Aelius Lampridius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexander Severus</span></span>, 37; Trebellius Pollio, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Claudius</span></span>, iv. 2) refer to the great spring festival of Cybele and Attis in a way which seems to imply that the festival was officially recognized by the Roman government before Claudius Gothicus succeeded to the purple; and we may hesitate to follow Prof. von Domaszewski in simply excising these passages as the work of an <span class="tei tei-q">“impudent forger.”</span> (4) The official establishment of the bloody Phrygian superstition suits better the life and character of the superstitious, timid, cruel, pedantic Claudius of the first century than the gallant soldier his namesake in the third century. The one lounged away his contemptible days in the safety of the palace, surrounded by a hedge of lifeguards. The other spent the two years of his brief but glorious reign in camps and battlefields on the frontier, combating the barbarian enemies of the empire; and it is probable that he had as little leisure as inclination to pander to the superstitions of the Roman populace. For these reasons it seems better with Mr. Hepding and Prof. Cumont to acquiesce in the traditional view that the rites of Attis were officially celebrated at Rome from the first century onward.</p>
							<p>An intermediate view is adopted by Prof. G. Wissowa, who, brushing aside the statement of Joannes Lydus altogether, would seemingly assign the public institution of the rites to the middle of the second century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> on the ground that the earliest extant evidence of their public celebration refers to that period (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Munich, 1912, p. 322). But, considering the extremely imperfect evidence at our disposal for the history of these centuries, it seems rash to infer that an official cult cannot have been older than the earliest notice of it which has chanced to come down to us.</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_785" id="note_785" name="note_785">785.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tactica</span></span>, 33; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> xii. 836.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_786" id="note_786" name="note_786">786.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the festival see J. Marquardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Staatsverwaltung</span></span>, iii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1885) pp. 370 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; the calendar of Philocalus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, vol. i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Pars prior (Berlin, 1893), p. 260, with Th. Mommsen's commentary (pp. 313 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>); W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</span></span>, pp. 291 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 572 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 318 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 147 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1911) pp. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_787" id="note_787" name="note_787">787.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orat.</span></span> v. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>, p. 218 ed. F. C. Hertlein (Leipsic, 1875-1876); Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mensibus</span></span>, iv. 41; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. chs. 7, 16, 39; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 27; Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> iv., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33. As to the guild of Tree-bearers (<i xml:lang="la">Dendrophori</i>) see Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 4171-4174, 4176; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 86, 92, 93, 96, 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Dendrophori,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, v. 1. coll. 216-219; J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, ii. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_788" id="note_788" name="note_788">788.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span> and 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>, p. 219 ed. F. C. Hertlein. The ceremony may have been combined with the old <i xml:lang="la">tubilustrium</i> or purification of trumpets, which fell on this day. See Joannes Lydus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mensibus</span></span>, iv. 42; Varro, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De lingua Latina</span></span>, vi. 14; Festus, pp. 352, 353 ed. C. O. Müller; W. Warde Fowler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</span></span> (London, 1899), p. 62.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_789" id="note_789" name="note_789">789.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Trebellius Pollio, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Claudius</span></span>, 4; Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apologeticus</span></span>, 25.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_790" id="note_790" name="note_790">790.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deorum dialogi</span></span>, xii. 1; Seneca, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Agamemnon</span></span>, 686 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Martial, xi. 84. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Valerius Flaccus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argonaut.</span></span> viii. 239 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Statius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theb.</span></span> x. 170 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apuleius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> viii. 27; Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divinarum Institutionum Epitome</span></span>, 23 (18, vol. i. p. 689 ed. Brandt and Laubmann); H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 158 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the music of these dancing dervishes see also Lucretius, ii. 618 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_791" id="note_791" name="note_791">791.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 101 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_792" id="note_792" name="note_792">792.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Minucius Felix, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Octavius</span></span>, 22 and 24; Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. Instit.</span></span> i. 21. 16; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epitoma</span></span>, 8; Schol. on Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jupiter Tragoedus</span></span>, 8 (p. 60 ed. H. Rabe); Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> ix. 115; Prudentius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peristephan.</span></span> x. 1066 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-q">“Passio Sancti Symphoriani,”</span> chs. 2 and 6 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, v. 1463, 1466); Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 14; Scholiast on Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexipharmaca</span></span>, 8; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 163 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A story told by Clement of Alexandria (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 15, p. 13 ed. Potter) suggests that weaker brethren may have been allowed to sacrifice the virility of a ram instead of their own. We know from inscriptions that rams and bulls were regularly sacrificed at the mysteries of Attis and the Great Mother, and that the testicles of the bulls were used for a special purpose, probably as a fertility charm. May not the testicles of the rams have been employed for the same purpose? and may not those of both animals have been substitutes for the corresponding organs in men? As to the sacrifices of rams and bulls see G. Zippel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Taurobolium,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Festschrift zum fünfzigjährigen Doctorjubiläum L. Friedlaender</span></span> (Leipsic, 1895), pp. 498 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4118 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, ii. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_793" id="note_793" name="note_793">793.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_794" id="note_794" name="note_794">794.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xiv. 1. 23, p. 641.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_795" id="note_795" name="note_795">795.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 15, 27, 50-53.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_796" id="note_796" name="note_796">796.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_797" id="note_797" name="note_797">797.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> 15.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_798" id="note_798" name="note_798">798.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>, 49-51.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_799" id="note_799" name="note_799">799.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>Catullus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Carm.</span></span> lxiii. I agree with Mr. H. Hepding (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, p. 140) in thinking that the subject of the poem is not the mythical Attis, but one of his ordinary priests, who bore the name and imitated the sufferings of his god. Thus interpreted the poem gains greatly in force and pathos. The real sorrows of our fellow-men touch us more nearly than the imaginary pangs of the gods.</p>
							<p>As the sacrifice of virility and the institution of eunuch priests appear to be rare, I will add a few examples. At Stratonicea in Caria a eunuch held a sacred office in connexion with the worship of Zeus and Hecate (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>, No. 2715). According to Eustathius (on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, xix. 254, p. 1183) the Egyptian priests were eunuchs who had sacrificed their virility as a first-fruit to the gods. In Corea <span class="tei tei-q">“during a certain night, known as <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Chu-il</span></span>, in the twelfth moon, the palace eunuchs, of whom there are some three hundred, perform a ceremony supposed to ensure a bountiful crop in the ensuing year. They chant in chorus prayers, swinging burning torches around them the while. This is said to be symbolical of burning the dead grass, so as to destroy the field mice and other vermin.”</span> See W. Woodville Rockhill, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some of the Laws, Customs, and Superstitions of Korea,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The American Anthropologist</span></span>, iv. (Washington, 1891) p. 185. Compare Mrs. Bishop, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Korea and her Neighbours</span></span> (London, 1898), ii. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It appears that among the Ekoi of Southern Nigeria both men and women are, or used to be, mutilated by the excision of their genital organs at an annual festival, which is celebrated in order to produce plentiful harvests and immunity from thunderbolts. The victims apparently die from loss of blood. See P. Amaury Talbot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In the Shadow of the Bush</span></span> (London, 1912), pp. 74 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Mr. Talbot writes to me: <span class="tei tei-q">“A horrible case has just happened at Idua, where, at the new yam planting, a man cut off his own <i xml:lang="la">membrum virile</i>”</span> (letter dated Eket, Nr Calabar, Southern Nigeria, Feb. 7th, 1913). Amongst the Ba-sundi and Ba-bwende of the Congo many youths are castrated <span class="tei tei-q">“in order to more fittingly offer themselves to the phallic worship, which increasingly prevails as we advance from the coast to the interior. At certain villages between Manyanga and Isangila there are curious eunuch dances to celebrate the new moon, in which a white cock is thrown up into the air alive, with clipped wings, and as it falls towards the ground it is caught and plucked by the eunuchs. I was told that originally this used to be a human sacrifice, and that a young boy or girl was thrown up into the air and torn to pieces by the eunuchs as he or she fell, but that of late years slaves had got scarce or manners milder, and a white cock was now substituted”</span> (H. H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Races of the Congo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) p. 473; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The River Congo</span></span>, London, 1884, p. 409). In India, men who are born eunuchs or in some way deformed are sometimes dedicated to a goddess named Huligamma. They wear female attire and might be mistaken for women. Also men who are or believe themselves impotent will vow to dress as women and serve the goddess in the hope of recovering their virility. See F. Fawcett, <span class="tei tei-q">“On Basivis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</span></span>, ii. 343 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Pegu the English traveller, Alexander Hamilton, witnessed a dance in honour of the gods of the earth. <span class="tei tei-q">“Hermaphrodites, who are numerous in this country, are generally chosen, if there are enough present to make a set for the dance. I saw nine dance like mad folks for above half-an-hour; and then some of them fell in fits, foaming at the mouth for the space of half-an-hour; and, when their senses are restored, they pretend to foretell plenty or scarcity of corn for that year, if the year will prove sickly or salutary to the people, and several other things of moment, and all by that half hour's conversation that the furious dancer had with the gods while she was in a trance”</span> (A. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-q">“A New Account of the East Indies,”</span> in J. Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, viii. 427). So in the worship of Attis the Archigallus or head of the eunuch priests prophesied; perhaps he in like manner worked himself up to the pitch of inspiration by a frenzied dance. See H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, vol. ii. Pars i. pp. 142, 143, Nos. 4130, 4136; G. Wilmanns, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span> (Berlin, 1873), vol. i. p. 36, Nos. 119a, 120; J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, ii. 93 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the sacrifice of virility in the Syrian religion compare Th. Nöldeke, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Selbstentmannung bei den Syrern,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, x. (1907) pp. 150-152.</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_800" id="note_800" name="note_800">800.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 7 and 16; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> ix. 115.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_801" id="note_801" name="note_801">801.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, iii. 59; Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tactica</span></span>, 33; Scholiast on Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexipharmaca</span></span>, 8; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 3 and 22; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 16; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> ix. 115.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_802" id="note_802" name="note_802">802.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg267">267</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_803" id="note_803" name="note_803">803.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> iv., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_804" id="note_804" name="note_804">804.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg230">230</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_805" id="note_805" name="note_805">805.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg274">274</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_806" id="note_806" name="note_806">806.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 22, <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Nocte quadam simulacrum in lectica supinum ponitur et per numeros digestis fletibus plangitur: deinde cum se ficta lamentatione satiaverint, lumen infertur: tunc a sacerdote omnium qui flebant fauces unguentur, quibus perunctis hoc lento murmure susurrat:</i></span></p>
							<p>θαρρεῖτε μύσται τοῦ θέου σεσωσμένου; ἔσται γὰρ ἡμῖν ἐκ πόνων σωτήρια.</p>
							<p><span class="tei tei-q"><i xml:lang="la">Quid miseros hortaris gaudeant? quid deceptos homines laetari compellis? quam illis spem, quam salutem funesta persuasione promittis? Dei tui mors nota est, vita non paret.... Idolum sepelis, idolum plangis, idolum de sepultura proferis, et miser cum haec feceris, gaudes. Tu deum tuum liberas, tu jacentia lapidis membra componis, tu insensibile corrigis saxum.</i>”</span> In this passage Firmicus does not expressly mention Attis, but that the reference is to his rites is made probable by a comparison with chapter 3 of the same writer's work. Compare also Damascius, in Photius's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, p. 345 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>, 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ed. I. Bekker (Berlin, 1824), τότε τῇ Ἱεραπόλει ἐγκαθευδήσας ἐδόκουν ὄναρ ὁ Ἄττης γένεσθαι, καί μοι ἐπιτελεῖσθαι παρὰ τῆς μητρὸς τῶν θεῶν τὴν τῶν ἱλαρίων καλουμένων ἑορτήν; ὅπερ ἐδήλου τὴν ἐξ ᾅδου γεγονυῖαν ἡμῶν σωτηρίαν. See further Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1909), pp. 89 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_807" id="note_807" name="note_807">807.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn</span></span>. i. 21. 10; Flavius Vopiscus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aurelianus</span></span>, i. 1; Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> v. pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>, 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>; Damascius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Herodian, i. 10. 5-7; Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33. In like manner Easter Sunday, the Resurrection-day of Christ, was called by some ancient writers the Sunday of Joy (<i xml:lang="la">Dominica Gaudii</i>). The emperors used to celebrate the happy day by releasing from prison all but the worst offenders. See J. Bingham, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Antiquities of the Christian Church</span></span>, bk. xx. ch. vi. §§ 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Bingham's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Works</span></span> (Oxford, 1855), vii. 317 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_808" id="note_808" name="note_808">808.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aelius Lampridius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexander Severus</span></span>, 37.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_809" id="note_809" name="note_809">809.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Pars prior (Berlin, 1893), pp. 260, 313 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 51, 172.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_810" id="note_810" name="note_810">810.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iv. 337-346; Silius Italicus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Punic.</span></span> viii. 365; Valerius Flaccus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argonaut.</span></span> viii. 239 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Martial, iii. 47. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 3. 7; Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, vii. 32; Prudentius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peristephon.</span></span> x. 154 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> For the description of the image of the goddess see Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, vii. 49. At Carthage the goddess was carried to her bath in a litter, not in a wagon (Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, ii. 4). The bath formed part of the festival in Phrygia, whence the custom was borrowed by the Romans (Arrian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tactica</span></span>, 33). At Cyzicus the Placianian Mother, a form of Cybele, was served by women called <span class="tei tei-q">“marine”</span> (Θαλάσσιαι), whose duty it probably was to wash her image in the sea (Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, Brussels, 1900, pp. 403 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 537). See further J. Marquardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Staatsverwaltung</span></span>, iii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> 373; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 133 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_811" id="note_811" name="note_811">811.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 15, p. 13 ed. Potter; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 18.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_812" id="note_812" name="note_812">812.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg272">272</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_813" id="note_813" name="note_813">813.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, p. 185.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_814" id="note_814" name="note_814">814.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Prudentius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peristephan.</span></span> x. 1006-1050; compare Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 28. 8. That the bath of bull's blood (<i xml:lang="la">taurobolium</i>) was believed to regenerate the devotee for eternity is proved by an inscription found at Rome, which records that a certain Sextilius Agesilaus Aedesius, who dedicated an altar to Attis and the Mother of the Gods, was <i xml:lang="la">taurobolio criobolioque in aeternum renatus</i> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, vi. No. 510; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, No. 4152). The phrase <i xml:lang="la">arcanis perfusionibus in aeternum renatus</i> occurs in a dedication to Mithra (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, vi. No. 736), which, however, is suspected of being spurious. As to the inscriptions which refer to the <i xml:lang="la">taurobolium</i> see G. Zippel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Taurobolium,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Festschrift zum fünfzigjährigen Doctorjubiläum L. Friedlaender dargebracht von seinen Schülern</span></span> (Leipsic, 1895), pp. 498-520; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, vol. ii. Pars i. pp. 140-147, Nos. 4118-4159. As to the origin of the <i xml:lang="la">taurobolium</i> and the meaning of the word, see Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments Figurés relatifs aux Mystères de Mithra</span></span> (Brussels, 1896-1899), i. 334 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 100 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span>, ii. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 322 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The <i xml:lang="la">taurobolium</i> seems to have formed no part of the original worship of Cybele and to have been imported into it at a comparatively late date, perhaps in the second century of our era. Its origin is obscure. In the majority of the older inscriptions the name of the rite appears as <i xml:lang="la">tauropolium</i>, and it has been held that this is the true form, being derived from the worship of the Asiatic goddess Artemis Tauropolis (Strabo, xii. 2. 7, p. 537). This was formerly the view of Prof. F. Cumont (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Anaitis,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, i. 2. col. 2031); but he now prefers the form <i xml:lang="la">taurobolium</i>, and would deduce both the name and the rite from an ancient Anatolian hunting custom of lassoing wild bulls.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_815" id="note_815" name="note_815">815.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> iv., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_816" id="note_816" name="note_816">816.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_817" id="note_817" name="note_817">817.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, vi. Nos. 497-504; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4145, 4147-4151, 4153; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Graecae Siciliae et Italiae</span></span>, ed. G. Kaibel (Berlin, 1890), p. 270, No. 1020; G. Zippel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 509 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 519; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 83, 86-88, 176; Ch. Huelsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Topographie der Stadt Rom im Alterthum, von H. Jordan</span></span>, i. 3 (Berlin, 1907), pp. 658 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_818" id="note_818" name="note_818">818.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, xiii. No. 1751; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, No. 4131; G. Wilmanns, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span> (Berlin, 1873), vol. ii. p. 125, No. 2278; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 267; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 169-171, 176.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_819" id="note_819" name="note_819">819.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, xiii. No. 1751; G. Wilmanns, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, vol. i. pp. 35-37, Nos. 119, 123, 124; H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4127, 4129, 4131, 4140; G. Wissowa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Kultus der Römer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 322 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, p. 191.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_820" id="note_820" name="note_820">820.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the monuments see H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4143, 4152, 4153; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 82, 83, 88, 89.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_821" id="note_821" name="note_821">821.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 27.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_822" id="note_822" name="note_822">822.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 71; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, i. 138, 143, 152, 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_823" id="note_823" name="note_823">823.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Etymologicum Magnum, p. 220, line 20, Γάλλος, ὁ φιλοπάτωρ Πτολεμαῖος; διὰ τὸ φύλλα κισσοῦ κατέστιχθαι, ὡς οἱ γάλλοι. ᾽Αεὶ γὰρ ταῖς Διονυσιακαῖς τελεταῖς κισσῷ ἐστεφανοῦντο. But there seems to be some confusion here between the rites of Dionysus and those of Attis; ivy was certainly sacred to Dionysus (Pausanias, i. 31. 6 with my note). Compare C. A. Lobeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aglaophamus</span></span> (Königsberg, 1829), i. 657, who, in the passage quoted, rightly defends the readings κατέστιχθαι and ἐστεφανοῦντο.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_824" id="note_824" name="note_824">824.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">9</span></span> xix. 105. Compare Athenaeus, ii. 49, p. 57. The nuts of the silver-pine (<i xml:lang="la">Pinus edulis</i>) are a favourite food of the Californian Indians (S. Powers, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tribes of California</span></span> (Washington, 1877), p. 421); the Wintun Indians hold a pine-nut dance when the nuts are fit to be gathered (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span> p. 237). The Shuswap Indians of British Columbia collect the cones of various sorts of pines and eat the nutlets which they extract from them. See G. M. Dawson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada</span></span>, ix. (Montreal, 1892) Transactions, section ii. p. 22. With regard to the Araucanian Indians of South America we read that <span class="tei tei-q">“the great staple food, the base of all their subsistence, save among the coast tribes, was the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">piñon</span></span>, the fruit of the Araucanian pine (<i xml:lang="la">Araucaria imbricata</i>). Every year during the autumn months excursions are made by the whole tribe to the pine forests, where they remain until they have collected sufficient for the following year. Each tribe has its own district, inherited by custom from generation to generation and inviolate, by unwritten law, from other tribes, even in time of warfare. This harvest was formerly of such supreme importance, that all inter-tribal quarrels and warfares were suspended by mutual accord during this period.”</span> See R. E. Latcham, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ethnology of the Araucanos,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxix. (1909) p. 341. The Gilyaks of the Amoor valley in like manner eat the nutlets of the Siberian stone-pine (L. von Schrenk, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Völker des Amur-Landes</span></span>, iii. 440). See also the commentators on Herodotus, iv. 109 φθειροτραγέουσι.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_825" id="note_825" name="note_825">825.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xiv. 103.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_826" id="note_826" name="note_826">826.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, x. 3. 12 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, pp. 469 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> However, tipsy people were excluded from the sanctuary of Attis (Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 6).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_827" id="note_827" name="note_827">827.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dial. Meretr.</span></span> ii. 1, p. 276 ed. H. Rabe (Leipsic, 1906).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_828" id="note_828" name="note_828">828.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refutatio omnium haeresium</span></span>, v. 8 and 9, pp. 162, 168 ed. Duncker and Schneidewin; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, 3; Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33. Others identified him with the spring flowers. See Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praeparatio Evangelii</span></span>, iii. 11. 8 and 12, iii. 13. 10 ed. F. A. Heinichen (Leipsic, 1842-1843); Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, vii. 25.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_829" id="note_829" name="note_829">829.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Helbig, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Führer durch die öffentlichen Sammlungen klassischer Altertümer in Rom</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Leipsic, 1899), i. 481, No. 721.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_830" id="note_830" name="note_830">830.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The urn is in the Lateran Museum at Rome (No. 1046). It is not described by W. Helbig in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Führer</span></span>.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> The inscription on the urn (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">M. Modius Maxximus archigallus coloniae Ostiens</span></span>) is published by H. Dessau (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, No. 4162), who does not notice the curious and interesting composition of the cock's tail. The bird is chosen as an emblem of the priest with a punning reference to the word <i xml:lang="la">gallus</i>, which in Latin means a cock as well as a priest of Attis.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_831" id="note_831" name="note_831">831.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Gregory of Tours, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De gloria confessorum</span></span>, 77 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, lxxi. 884). That the goddess here referred to was Cybele and not a native Gallic deity, as I formerly thought (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship</span></span>, p. 178), seems proved by the <span class="tei tei-q">“Passion of St. Symphorian,”</span> chs. 2 and 6 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, v. 1463, 1466). Gregory and the author of the <span class="tei tei-q">“Passion of St. Symphorian”</span> call the goddess simply Berecynthia, the latter writer adding <span class="tei tei-q">“the Mother of the Demons,”</span> which is plainly a Christian version of the title <span class="tei tei-q">“Mother of the Gods.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_832" id="note_832" name="note_832">832.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg265">265</a>. In the island of Thera an ox, wheat, barley, wine, and <span class="tei tei-q">“other first-fruits of all that the seasons produce”</span> were offered to the Mother of the Gods, plainly because she was deemed the source of fertility. See G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. ii. p. 426, No. 630.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_833" id="note_833" name="note_833">833.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 215-217; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> p. 175 note 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_834" id="note_834" name="note_834">834.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ptolemaeus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nov. Hist.</span></span> i. p. 183 of A. Westermann's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythographi Graeci</span></span> (Brunswick, 1843).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_835" id="note_835" name="note_835">835.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, viii. 25. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_836" id="note_836" name="note_836">836.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Anim.</span></span> xii. 30. The place was in Mesopotamia, and the goddess was probably Astarte. So Lucian (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dea Syria</span></span>) calls the Astarte of Hierapolis <span class="tei tei-q">“the Assyrian Hera.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_837" id="note_837" name="note_837">837.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ii. 38. 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_838" id="note_838" name="note_838">838.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orat.</span></span> v. 173 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (pp. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> ed. F. C. Hertlein); H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 155-157. However, apples, pomegranates, and dates were also forbidden. The story that the mother of Attis conceived him through contact with a pomegranate (above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg263">263</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg269">269</a>) might explain the prohibition of that fruit. But the reasons for tabooing apples and dates are not apparent, though Julian tried to discover them. He suggested that dates may have been forbidden because the date-palm does not grow in Phrygia, the native land of Cybele and Attis.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_839" id="note_839" name="note_839">839.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Kretschmer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</span></span> (Göttingen, 1896), p. 355.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_840" id="note_840" name="note_840">840.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, iii. 58. 4; Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refutatio omnium haeresium</span></span>, i. 9, p. 168 ed. Duncker and Schneidewin. A Latin dedication to <i xml:lang="la">Atte Papa</i> has been found at Aquileia (F. Cumont, in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, ii. 2180, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Attepata”</span> H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, p. 86). Greek dedications to Papas or to Zeus Papas occur in Phrygia (H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 78 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Compare A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xviii. (1904) p. 79.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_841" id="note_841" name="note_841">841.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arnobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Nationes</span></span>, v. 6 and 13.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_842" id="note_842" name="note_842">842.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) Edward B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Culture</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1873), i. 223.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_843" id="note_843" name="note_843">843.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rapp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kybele,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1648.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_844" id="note_844" name="note_844">844.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">She is called a <span class="tei tei-q">“motherless virgin”</span> by Julian (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> v. 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>, p. 215 ed. F. C. Hertlein), and there was a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Parthenon</span></span> or virgin's chamber in her sanctuary at Cyzicus (Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, p. 404, No. 538). Compare Rapp, in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1648; Wagner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Nana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ibid.</span></span> iii. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Another great goddess of fertility who was conceived as a Virgin Mother was the Egyptian Neith or Net. She is called <span class="tei tei-q">“the Great Goddess, the Mother of All the Gods,”</span> and was believed to have brought forth Ra, the Sun, without the help of a male partner. See C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 111; E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span> (London, 1904), i. 457-462. The latter writer says (p. 462): <span class="tei tei-q">“In very early times Net was the personification of the eternal female principle of life which was self-sustaining and self-existent, and was secret and unknown, and all-pervading; the more material thinkers, whilst admitting that she brought forth her son Rā without the aid of a husband, were unable to divorce from their minds the idea that a male germ was necessary for its production, and finding it impossible to derive it from a being external to the goddess, assumed that she herself provided not only the substance which was to form the body of Rā but also the male germ which fecundated it. Thus Net was the type of partheno-genesis.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_845" id="note_845" name="note_845">845.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Quoted by Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Il.</span></span> v. 408; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. 592, Frag. 30.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_846" id="note_846" name="note_846">846.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) Edward B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Culture</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 321 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 270 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> For example, the Ewe people of Togo-land, in West Africa, think that the Earth is the wife of the Sky, and that their marriage takes place in the rainy season, when the rain causes the seeds to sprout and bear fruit. These fruits they regard as the children of Mother Earth, who in their opinion is the mother also of men and of gods. See J. Spieth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Ewe-Stämme</span></span> (Berlin, 1906), pp. 464, 548. In the regions of the Senegal and the Niger it is believed that the Sky-god and the Earth-goddess are the parents of the principal spirits who dispense life and death, weal and woe, among mankind. The eldest son of Sky and Earth is represented in very various forms, sometimes as a hermaphrodite, sometimes in semi-animal shape, with the head of a bull, a crocodile, a fish, or a serpent. His name varies in the different tribes, but the outward form of his ceremonies is everywhere similar. His rites, which are to some extent veiled in mystery, are forbidden to women. See Maurice Delafosse, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Haut-Sénégal-Niger</span></span> (Paris, 1912), iii. 173-175.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_847" id="note_847" name="note_847">847.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesiod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theogony</span></span>, 159 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_848" id="note_848" name="note_848">848.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De antro nympharum</span></span>, 16; Aristides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> iii. (vol. i. p. 35 ed. G. Dindorf, Leipsic, 1829); Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argon.</span></span> iv. 983.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_849" id="note_849" name="note_849">849.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Lang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Custom and Myth</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myth, Ritual, and Religion</span></span> (London, 1887), i. 299 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In Egyptian mythology the separation of heaven and earth was ascribed to Shu, the god of light, who insinuated himself between the bodies of Seb (Keb) the earth-god and of Nut the sky-goddess. On the monuments Shu is represented holding up the star-spangled body of Nut on his hands, while Seb reclines on the ground. See A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Ancient Egyptians</span></span> (London, 1897), pp. 230 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span>, ii. 90, 97 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 100, 105; A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die ägyptische Religion</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1909), pp. 35 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Thus contrary to the usual mythical conception the Egyptians regarded the earth as male and the sky as female. An allusion in the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Book of the Dead</span></span> (ch. 69, vol. ii. p. 235, E. A. Wallis Budge's translation, London, 1901) has been interpreted as a hint that Osiris mutilated his father Seb at the separation of earth and heaven, just as Cronus mutilated his father Uranus. See H. Brugsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion und Mythologie der alten Aegypter</span></span> (Leipsic, 1885-1888), p. 581; E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Sometimes the Egyptians conceived the sky as a great cow standing with its legs on the earth. See A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die ägyptische Religion</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 7, 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_850" id="note_850" name="note_850">850.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_851" id="note_851" name="note_851">851.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Julian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> v. pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>, 170 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span> (pp. 214, 221, ed. F. C. Hertlein); Sallustius philosophus, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis et mundo,”</span> iv. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. F. G. A. Mullach, iii. 33.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_852" id="note_852" name="note_852">852.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Drexler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Men,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 2745; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, p. 120, note 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_853" id="note_853" name="note_853">853.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, vol. ii. Pars i. pp. 145 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, Nos. 4146-4149; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 82, 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 89 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to Men Tyrannus, see Drexler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Men,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Myth.</span></span> ii. 2687 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_854" id="note_854" name="note_854">854.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the other hand Sir W. M. Ramsay holds that Attis and Men are deities of similar character and origin, but differentiated from each other by development in different surroundings (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</span></span>, i. 169); but he denies that Men was a moon-god (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 104, note 4).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_855" id="note_855" name="note_855">855.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In letters of Eumenes and Attalus, preserved in inscriptions at Sivrihissar, the priest at Pessinus is addressed as Attis. See A. von Domaszewski, <span class="tei tei-q">“Briefe der Attaliden an den Priester von Pessinus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archaeologische-epigraphische Mittheilungen aus Oesterreich-Ungarn</span></span>, viii. (1884) pp. 96, 98; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, pp. 57 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> No. 45; W. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orientis Graeci Inscriptiones Selectae</span></span> (Leipsic, 1903-1905), vol. i. pp. 482 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> No. 315. For more evidence of inscriptions see H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, p. 79; Rapp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Attis,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 724. See also Polybius, xxii. 18 (20), (ed. L. Dindorf), who mentions a priest of the Mother of the Gods named Attis at Pessinus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_856" id="note_856" name="note_856">856.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The conjecture is that of Henzen, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annal. d. Inst.</span></span> 1856, p. 110, referred to by Rapp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_857" id="note_857" name="note_857">857.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 75 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 151 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 209.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_858" id="note_858" name="note_858">858.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Article <span class="tei tei-q">“Phrygia,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>, 9th ed. xviii. (1885) p. 853. Elsewhere, speaking of the religions of Asia Minor in general, the same writer says: <span class="tei tei-q">“The highest priests and priestesses played the parts of the great gods in the mystic ritual, wore their dress, and bore their names”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</span></span>, i. 101).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_859" id="note_859" name="note_859">859.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xii. 5. 3, p. 567.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_860" id="note_860" name="note_860">860.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Study of Phrygian Art,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 379 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Study of Phrygian Art,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, x. (1889) pp. 156 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. Perrot et Ch. Chipiez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de l'Art dans l'Antiquité</span></span>, v. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_861" id="note_861" name="note_861">861.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 94. According to Sir W. M. Ramsay, the conquering and ruling caste in Lydia belonged to the Phrygian stock (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) p. 351).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_862" id="note_862" name="note_862">862.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 34-45. The tradition that Croesus would allow no iron weapon to come near Atys suggests that a similar taboo may have been imposed on the Phrygian priests named Attis. For taboos of this sort see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_863" id="note_863" name="note_863">863.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Stein on Herodotus, i. 43; Ed. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Atys,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, ii. 2 col. 2262.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_864" id="note_864" name="note_864">864.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg013">13</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg016">16</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg048">48</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_865" id="note_865" name="note_865">865.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Dying God</span></span>, pp. 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_866" id="note_866" name="note_866">866.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See (Sir) W. M. Ramsay, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Phrygia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>, 9th ed. xviii. 849 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“A Study of Phrygian Art,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, ix. (1888) pp. 350 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Prof. P. Kretschmer holds that both Cybele and Attis were gods of the indigenous Asiatic population, not of the Phrygian invaders (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</span></span>, Göttingen, 1896, pp. 194 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_867" id="note_867" name="note_867">867.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, iii. 58 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to Marsyas in the character of a shepherd or herdsman see Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 165; Nonnus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dionys.</span></span> i. 41 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> He is called a Silenus by Pausanias (i. 24. 1).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_868" id="note_868" name="note_868">868.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, x. 30. 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_869" id="note_869" name="note_869">869.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 4. 2; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 165. Many ancient writers mention that the tree on which Marsyas suffered death was a pine. See Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Alexipharmaca</span></span>, 301 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with the Scholiast's note; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tragodopodagra</span></span>, 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Archias Mitylenaeus, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthologia Palatina</span></span>, vii. 696; Philostratus, Junior, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Imagines</span></span>, i. 3; Longus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pastor.</span></span> iv. 8; Zenobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cent.</span></span> iv. 81; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chiliades</span></span>, i. 353 sqq. Pliny alone declares the tree to have been a plane, which according to him was still shown at Aulocrene on the way from Apamea to Phrygia (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xvi. 240). On a candelabra in the Vatican the defeated Marsyas is represented hanging on a pine-tree (W. Helbig, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Führer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>); but the monumental evidence is not consistent on this point (Jessen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Marsyas,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 2442). The position which the pine held in the myth and ritual of Cybele supports the preponderance of ancient testimony in favour of that tree.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_870" id="note_870" name="note_870">870.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, vii. 26; Xenophon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anabasis</span></span>, i. 2. 8; Livy, xxxviii. 13. 6; Quintus Curtius, iii. 1. 1-5; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> v. 106. Herodotus calls the river the Catarrhactes.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_871" id="note_871" name="note_871">871.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Var. Hist</span></span>. xiii. 21.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_872" id="note_872" name="note_872">872.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Catullus, lxiii. 22; Lucretius, ii. 620; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iv. 181 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 341; Polyaenus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Stratagem.</span></span> viii. 53. 4. Flutes or pipes often appear on her monuments. See H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4100, 4143, 4145, 4152, 4153.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_873" id="note_873" name="note_873">873.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refutatio omnium haeresium</span></span>, v. 9, p. 168, ed. Duncker and Schneidewin.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_874" id="note_874" name="note_874">874.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Adam of Bremen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptio insularum Aquilonis</span></span>, 27 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, cxlvi. 643).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_875" id="note_875" name="note_875">875.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. Bugge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Studien über die Entstehung der nördischen Götter- und Heldensagen</span></span> (Munich, 1889), pp. 339 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. Simrock, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Edda</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">8</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1882), p. 382; K. Müllenhoff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Altertumskunde</span></span> (Berlin, 1870-1900), iv. 244 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. M. Chadwick, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cult of Othin</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 3-20. The old English custom of hanging and disembowelling traitors was probably derived from a practice of thus sacrificing them to Odin; for among many races, including the Teutonic and Latin peoples, capital punishment appears to have been originally a religious rite, a sacrifice or consecration of the criminal to the god whom he had offended. See F. Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Volkskunde</span></span> (Heilbronn, 1879), pp. 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; K. von Amira, in H. Paul's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Grundriss der germanischen Philologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> iii. (Strasburg, 1900) pp. 197 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Vigfusson and F. York Powell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Poeticum Boreale</span></span> (Oxford, 1883), i. 410; W. Golther, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der germanischen Mythologie</span></span> (Leipsic, 1895), pp. 548 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Th. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman History</span></span>, bk. i. ch. 12 (vol. i. p. 192, ed. 1868); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römisches Strafrecht</span></span> (Leipsic, 1899), pp. 900 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. Granger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Worship of the Romans</span></span> (London, 1895), pp. 259 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; E. Westermarck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas</span></span>, i. (London, 1906) pp. 439 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> So, too, among barbarous peoples the slaughter of prisoners in war is often a sacrifice offered by the victors to the gods to whose aid they ascribe the victory. See A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</span></span> (London, 1887), pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Polynesian Researches</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1832-1836), i. 289; Diodorus Siculus, xx. 65; Strabo, vii. 2. 3, p. 294; Caesar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De bello Gallico</span></span>, vi. 17; Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals</span></span>, i. 61, xiii. 57; Procopius, De bello Gothico, ii. 15. 24, ii. 25. 9; Jornandes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Getica</span></span>, vi. 41; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Berlin, 1875-1878), i. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Fr. Schwally, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Semitische Kriegsaltertümer</span></span> (Leipsic, 1901), pp. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_876" id="note_876" name="note_876">876.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Havamal</span></span>, 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (K. Simrock, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Edda</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">8</span></span> p. 55; K. Müllenhoff, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Altertumskunde</span></span>, v. 270 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_877" id="note_877" name="note_877">877.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fay-Cooper Cole, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Wild Tribes of Davao District, Mindanao</span></span> (Chicago, 1913), pp. 114 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Field Museum of Natural History, Publication 170</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_878" id="note_878" name="note_878">878.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, viii. 23. 6 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The story, mentioned by Pausanias, that some children tied a rope round the neck of the image of Artemis was probably invented to explain a ritual practice of the same sort, as scholars have rightly perceived. See L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Mythologie</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> 305, note 2; L. R. Farnell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cults of the Greek States</span></span> (Oxford, 1896-1909), ii. 428 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. P. Nilsson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Feste</span></span> (Leipsic, 1906), pp. 232 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The Arcadian worship of the Hanged Artemis was noticed by Callimachus. See Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 38, p. 32, ed. Potter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_879" id="note_879" name="note_879">879.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Od.</span></span> xii. 85, p. 1714; I. Bekker, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anecdota Graeca</span></span> (Berlin, 1814-1821), i. 336 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἄγαλμα Ἑκάτης. The goddess Hecate was sometimes identified with Artemis, though in origin probably she was quite distinct. See L. R. Farnell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cults of the Greek States</span></span>, ii. 499 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_880" id="note_880" name="note_880">880.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> xiii.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_881" id="note_881" name="note_881">881.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 19. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_882" id="note_882" name="note_882">882.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. von Fritze, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zum griechischen Opferritual,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jahrbuch des kaiser. deutsch. Archäologischen Instituts</span></span>, xviii. (1903) pp. 58-67. In the ritual of Eleusis the sacrificial oxen were sometimes lifted up by young men from the ground. See G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. ii. pp. 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> No. 521 (ἤραντο δὲ καὶ τοῖς μυστηρίοις τοὺς βοῦς ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι τῇ θυσίαι, κτλ.); E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</span></span>, ii. (Cambridge, 1905) pp. 176 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 65. In this inscription the word ἤραντο is differently interpreted by P. Stengel, who supposes that it refers merely to turning backwards and upwards the head of the victim. See P. Stengel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zum griechischen Opferritual,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jahrbuch des kaiser. deutsch. Archäologischen Instituts</span></span>, xviii. (1903) pp. 113-123. But it seems highly improbable that so trivial an act should be solemnly commemorated in an inscription among the exploits of the young men (<i xml:lang="el">epheboi</i>) who performed it. On the other hand, we know that at Nysa the young men did lift and carry the sacrificial bull, and that the act was deemed worthy of commemoration on the coins. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg206">206</a>. The Wajagga of East Africa dread the ghosts of suicides; so when a man has hanged himself they take the rope from his neck and hang a goat in the fatal noose, after which they slay the animal. This is supposed to appease the ghost and prevent him from tempting human beings to follow his bad example. See B. Gutmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Trauer und Begrabnissitten der Wadschagga,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxxix. (1906) p. 200.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_883" id="note_883" name="note_883">883.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg146">146</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_884" id="note_884" name="note_884">884.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Scapegoat</span></span>, pp. 294 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_885" id="note_885" name="note_885">885.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, iv. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_886" id="note_886" name="note_886">886.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jean du Plan de Carpin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Mongalorum</span></span>, ed. D'Avezac (Paris, 1838), cap. iii. § iii.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_887" id="note_887" name="note_887">887.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages d'Ibn Batoutah, texte Arabe accompagné d'une traduction</span></span>, par C. Défrémery et B. R. Sanguinetti (Paris, 1853-1858), iv. 300 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For more evidence of similar customs, observed by Turanian peoples, see K. Neumann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Hellenen im Skythenlande</span></span> (Berlin, 1855), pp. 237-239.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_888" id="note_888" name="note_888">888.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Captain R. Fitz-roy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty's Ships</span> <span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-style: italic">“</span><span style="font-style: italic">Adventure</span><span style="font-style: italic">”</span></span> <span style="font-style: italic">and</span> <span class="tei tei-q"><span style="font-style: italic">“</span><span style="font-style: italic">Beagle</span><span style="font-style: italic">”</span></span></span> (London, 1839), ii. 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_889" id="note_889" name="note_889">889.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, iv. 103. Many Scythians flayed their dead enemies, and, stretching the skin on a wooden framework, carried it about with them on horseback (Herodotus, iv. 64). The souls of the dead may have been thought to attend on and serve the man who thus bore their remains about with him. It is also possible that the custom was nothing more than a barbarous mode of wreaking vengeance on the dead. Thus a Persian king has been known to flay an enemy, stuff the skin with chaff, and hang it on a high tree (Procopius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De bello Persico</span></span>, i. 5. 28). This was the treatment which the arch-heretic Manichaeus is said to have received at the hands of the Persian king whose son he failed to cure (Socrates, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, i. 22; Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, lxvii. 137, 139). Still such a punishment may have been suggested by a religious rite. The idea of crucifying their human victims appears to have been suggested to the negroes of Benin by the crucifixes of the early Portuguese missionaries. See H. Ling Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Great Benin</span></span> (Halifax, 1903), pp. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_890" id="note_890" name="note_890">890.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. Furness, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Home-Life of Borneo Head-Hunters</span></span> (Philadelphia, 1902), p. 59. According to Messrs. Hose and McDougall, the spirits which animate the skulls appear not to be those of the persons from whose shoulders the heads were taken. However, the spirits (called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Toh</span></span>) reside in or about the heads, and <span class="tei tei-q">“it is held that in some way their presence in the house brings prosperity to it, especially in the form of good crops; and so essential to the welfare of the house are the heads held to be that, if through fire a house has lost its heads and has no occasion for war, the people will beg a head, or even a fragment of one, from some friendly house, and will instal it in their own with the usual ceremonies.”</span> See Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Pagan Tribes of Borneo</span></span> (London, 1912), ii. 20, 23.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_891" id="note_891" name="note_891">891.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spenser St. John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in the Forests of the Far East</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1863), i. 197.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_892" id="note_892" name="note_892">892.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hugh Low, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sarawak</span></span> (London, 1848), pp. 206 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In quoting this passage I have taken the liberty to correct a grammatical slip.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_893" id="note_893" name="note_893">893.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>Spenser St. John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 204. See further G. A. Wilken, <span class="tei tei-q">“Iets over de schedelvereering,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, xxxviii. (1889) pp. 89-129; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verspreide Geschriften</span></span> (The Hague, 1912), iv. 37-81. A different view of the purpose of head-hunting is maintained by Mr. A. C. Kruyt, in his essay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het koppensnellen der Toradja's van Midden-Celebes, en zijne Beteekenis,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</span></span>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Vierde Reeks, iii. 2 (Amsterdam, 1899), pp. 147 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></p>
							<p>The natives of Nias, an island to the west of Sumatra, think it necessary to obtain the heads of their enemies for the purpose of celebrating the final obsequies of a dead chief. Their notion seems to be that the ghost of the deceased ruler demands this sacrifice in his honour, and will punish the omission of it by sending sickness or other misfortunes on the survivors. Thus among these people the custom of head-hunting is based on their belief in human immortality and on their conception of the exacting demands which the dead make upon the living. When the skulls have been presented to a dead chief, the priest prays to him for his blessing on the sowing and harvesting of the rice, on the fruitfulness of women, and so forth. See C. Fries, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das <span class="tei tei-q">‘Koppensnellen’</span> auf Nias,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</span></span>, February, 1908, pp. 73-88. From this account it would seem that it is not the spirits of the slain men, but the ghost of the dead chief from whom the blessings of fertility and so forth are supposed to emanate. Compare Th. C. Rappard, <span class="tei tei-q">“Het eiland Nias en zijne bewoners,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, lxii. (1909) pp. 609-611.</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_894" id="note_894" name="note_894">894.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 4-7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_895" id="note_895" name="note_895">895.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild</span></span>, ii. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_896" id="note_896" name="note_896">896.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Dessau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</span></span>, Nos. 4099, 4100, 4103, 4105, 4106, 4116, 4117, 4119, 4120, 4121, 4123, 4124, 4127, 4128, 4131, 4136, 4139, 4140, 4142, 4156, 4163, 4167; H. Hepding, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Attis</span></span>, pp. 85, 86, 93, 94, 95, Inscr. Nos. 21-24, 26, 50, 51, 52, 61, 62, 63. See further, J. Toutain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Cultes Païens dans l'Empire Romain</span></span> (Paris, 1911), pp. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 103 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_897" id="note_897" name="note_897">897.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. Dill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1899), p. 16.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_898" id="note_898" name="note_898">898.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, vii. 26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_899" id="note_899" name="note_899">899.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">But the two were publicly worshipped at Dyme and Patrae in Achaia (Pausanias, vii. 17. 9, vii. 20. 3), and there was an association for their worship at Piraeus. See P. Foucart, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Des Associations Religieuses chez les Grecs</span></span> (Paris, 1873), pp. 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 196; Ch. Michel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recueil d'Inscriptions Grecques</span></span>, p. 772, No. 982.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_900" id="note_900" name="note_900">900.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rapp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kybele,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1656.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_901" id="note_901" name="note_901">901.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the savage theory of inspiration or possession by a deity see (Sir) Edward B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Culture</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> ii. 131 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the savage theory of a new birth see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder the Beautiful</span></span>, ii. 251 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the use of blood to wash away sins see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 107 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche's Task</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Among the Cameroon negroes accidental homicide can be expiated by the blood of an animal. The relations of the slayer and of the slain assemble. An animal is killed and every person present is smeared with its blood on his face and breast. They think that the guilt of manslaughter is thus atoned for, and that no punishment will overtake the homicide. See Missionary Autenrieth, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zur Religion der Kamerun-Neger,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</span></span>, xii. (1893) pp. 93 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Car Nicobar a man possessed by devils is cleansed of them by being rubbed all over with pig's blood and beaten with leaves. The devils are thus transferred to the leaves, which are thrown into the sea before daybreak. See V. Solomon, <span class="tei tei-q">“Extracts from diaries kept in Car Nicobar,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) p. 227. Similarly the ancient Greeks purified a homicide by means of pig's blood and laurel leaves. See my note on Pausanias, ii. 31. 8 (vol. iii. pp. 276-279). The original idea of thus purging a manslayer was probably to rid him of the angry ghost of his victim, just as in Car Nicobar a man is rid of devils in the same manner. The purgative virtue ascribed to the blood in these ceremonies may be based on the notion that the offended spirit accepts it as a substitute for the blood of the guilty person. This was the view of C. Meiners (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religionen</span></span>, Hanover, 1806-1807, ii. 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) and of E. Rohde (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> Tübingen and Leipsic, 1903, ii. 77 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_902" id="note_902" name="note_902">902.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A good instance of such an attempt to dress up savagery in the garb of philosophy is the fifth speech of the emperor Julian, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Mother of the Gods”</span> (pp. 206 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> ed. F. C. Hertlein, Leipsic, 1875-1876).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_903" id="note_903" name="note_903">903.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the diffusion of Oriental religions in the Roman Empire see G. Boissier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion Romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Paris, 1900), i. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Reville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion à Rome sous les Sévères</span></span> (Paris, 1886), pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. Dill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 76 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_904" id="note_904" name="note_904">904.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> ii. 604, vi. 661; Origen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Celsum</span></span>, viii. 73 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xi. 1628); G. Boissier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Religion Romaine d'Auguste aux Antonins</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Paris, 1900), i. 357 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Westermarck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas</span></span> (London, 1906-1908), i. 345 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. H. Milman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Latin Christianity</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 150-153, ii. 90. In the passage just cited Origen tells us that the Christians refused to follow the Emperor to the field of battle even when he ordered them to do so; but he adds that they gave the emperor the benefit of their prayers and thus did him more real service than if they had fought for him with the sword. On the decline of the civic virtues under the influence of Christian asceticism see W. E. H. Lecky, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of European Morals from Augustus to Charlemagne</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (London, 1877), ii. 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_905" id="note_905" name="note_905">905.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">To prevent misapprehension I will add that the spread of Oriental religions was only one of many causes which contributed to the downfall of ancient civilization. Among these contributory causes a friend, for whose judgment and learning I entertain the highest respect, counts bad government and a ruinous fiscal system, two of the most powerful agents to blast the prosperity of nations, as may be seen in our own day by the blight which has struck the Turkish empire. It is probable, too, as my friend thinks, that the rapid diffusion of alien faiths was as much an effect as a cause of widespread intellectual decay. Such unwholesome growths could hardly have fastened upon the Graeco-Roman mind in the days of its full vigour. We may remember the energy with which the Roman Government combated the first outbreak of the Bacchic plague (Th. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman History</span></span>, iii. 115 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ed. 1894). The disastrous effects of Roman financial oppression on the industries and population of the empire, particularly of Greece, are described by George Finlay (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Greece under the Romans</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Edinburgh and London, 1857, pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_906" id="note_906" name="note_906">906.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments figurés relatifs aux Mystères de Mithra</span></span> (Brussels, 1896-1899); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Mithras,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 3028 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1909), pp. 207 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_907" id="note_907" name="note_907">907.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments</span></span>, i. 333 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_908" id="note_908" name="note_908">908.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Marc-Aurèle et la Fin du Monde Antique</span></span> (Paris, 1882), pp. 576 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments</span></span>, i. 339 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_909" id="note_909" name="note_909">909.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De corona</span></span>, 15; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De praescriptione haereticorum</span></span>, 40; Justin Martyr, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apologia</span></span>, i. 66; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dialogus cum Tryphone</span></span>, 78 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, vi. 429, 660). Tertullian explained in like manner the resemblance of the fasts of Isis and Cybele to the fasts of Christianity (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De jejunio</span></span>, 16). Justin Martyr thought that by listening to the words of the inspired prophets the devils discovered the divine intentions and anticipated them by a series of profane and blasphemous imitations. Among these travesties of Christian truth he enumerates the death, resurrection, and ascension of Dionysus, the virgin birth of Perseus, and Bellerophon mounted on Pegasus, whom he regards as a parody of Christ riding on an ass. See Justin Martyr, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apology</span></span>, i. 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_910" id="note_910" name="note_910">910.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. de Acosta, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natural and Moral History of the Indies</span></span>, translated by E. Grimston (London, 1880), bk. v. chs. 11, 16, 17, 18, 24-28, vol. ii. pp. 324 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 334 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 356 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_911" id="note_911" name="note_911">911.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare S. Dill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman Society in the Last Century of the Western Empire</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roman Society from Nero to Marcus Aurelius</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 619 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_912" id="note_912" name="note_912">912.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Renan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Marc-Aurèle et la Fin du Monde Antique</span></span> (Paris, 1882), pp. 579 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments</span></span>, i. 338.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_913" id="note_913" name="note_913">913.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xviii. 221; Columella, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De re rustica</span></span>, ix. 14. 12; L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span> (Berlin, 1825-1826), ii. 124; G. F. Unger, in Iwan Müller's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span> (Nördlingen, 1886) p. 649.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_914" id="note_914" name="note_914">914.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In the calendar of Philocalus the twenty-fifth of December is marked <i xml:lang="la">N. Invicti</i>, that is, <i xml:lang="la">Natalis Solis Invicti</i>. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Pars prior (Berlin, 1893), p. 278, with Th. Mommsen's commentary, pp. 338 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_915" id="note_915" name="note_915">915.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Cosmas Hierosolymitanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentarii in Sancti Gregorii Nazianzeni Carmina</span></span> (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xxxviii. 464): ταύτην [Christmas] ἧγον ἔκπαλαι δὲ τὴν ἡμέραν ἑορτὴν Ἔλληνες, καθ᾽ ἤν ἐτελοῦντο κατὰ τὸ μεσονύκτιον, ἐν ἀδύτοις τισὶν ὑπεισερχόμενοι, ὄθεν ἐξιόντες ἔκραζον: <span class="tei tei-q">“Ἡ παρθένος ἕτεκεν, αὔξει φῶς.”</span> ταύτην Ἐπιφάνιος ὁ μέγας τῆς Κυπρίων ἱερεύς φησι τὴν ἑορτὴν καὶ Σαῤῥακηνούς ἄγειν τῇπαρ᾽ αὐτῶν σεβομένῃ Ἀφροδίτῃ, ἤν δὴ Χαμαρᾶ τῇ αὐτῶν προσαγορεύουσι γλώττῃ. The passage is quoted, with some verbal variations, by Ch. Aug. Lobeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aglaophamus</span></span> (Königsberg, 1829), ii. 1227 note 2. See Franz Cumont, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le Natalis Invicti,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Comptes Rendus de l'Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres, 1911</span></span> (Paris, 1911), pp. 292-298, whose learned elucidations I follow in the text. That the festival of the Nativity of the Sun was similarly celebrated in Egypt may be inferred from a Greek calendar drawn up by the astrologer Antiochus in Lower Egypt at the end of the second or the beginning of the third century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span>; for under the 25th December the calendar has the entry, <span class="tei tei-q">“Birthday of the Sun, the light waxes”</span> (Ἡλίου γενέθλιον; αὔξει φῶς). See F. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 294.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_916" id="note_916" name="note_916">916.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturnalia</span></span>, i. 18. 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_917" id="note_917" name="note_917">917.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Caelestis,”</span> in Pauly-Wissowa's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, v. i. 1247 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> She was called the Queen of Heaven (Jeremiah vii. 18, xliv. 18), the Heavenly Goddess (Herodotus, iii. 8; Pausanias, i. 14. 7), or the Heavenly Virgin (Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apologeticus</span></span>, 23; Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, ii. 4). The Greeks spoke of her as the Heavenly Aphrodite (Herodotus, i. 105; Pausanias, i. 14. 7). A Greek inscription found in Delos contains a dedication to Astarte Aphrodite; and another found in the same island couples Palestinian Astarte and Heavenly Aphrodite. See G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecorum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. ii. pp. 619 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, No. 764; R. A. Stewart Macalister, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Philistines, their History and Civilization</span></span> (London, 1913), p. 94.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_918" id="note_918" name="note_918">918.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dedications to Mithra the Unconquered Sun (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Soli invicto Mithrae</span></span>) have been found in abundance. See Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments</span></span>, ii. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the worship of the Unconquered Sun (<i xml:lang="la">Sol Invictus</i>) see H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Weihnachtsfest</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Bonn, 1911), pp. 348 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_919" id="note_919" name="note_919">919.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 325 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 339.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_920" id="note_920" name="note_920">920.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Bingham, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Antiquities of the Christian Church</span></span>, bk. xx. ch. iv. (Bingham's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Works</span></span>, vol. vii. pp. 279 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, Oxford, 1855); C. A. Credner, <span class="tei tei-q">“De natalitiorum Christi origine,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für die historische Theologie</span></span>, iii. 2 (1833), pp. 236 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Mgr. L. Duchesne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origines du Culte Chrétien</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Paris, 1903), pp. 257 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Th. Mommsen, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Pars prior, p. 338. The earliest mention of the festival of Christmas is in the calendar of Philocalus, which was drawn up at Rome in 336 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a.d.</span></span> The words are <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">VIII. kal. jan.</span></span>, <i xml:lang="la">natus Christus in Betleem Judee</i> (L. Duchesne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 258).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_921" id="note_921" name="note_921">921.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Quoted by C. A. Credner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 239, note 46; by Th. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Pars prior, pp. 338 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; and by H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Weihnachtsfest</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Bonn, 1911), pp. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_922" id="note_922" name="note_922">922.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Serm.</span></span> cxc. 1 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xxxviii. 1007).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_923" id="note_923" name="note_923">923.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Leo the Great, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Serm.</span></span> xxii. (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">al.</span></span> xxi.) 6 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, liv. 198). Compare St. Ambrose, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Serm.</span></span> vi. 1 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xvii. 614).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_924" id="note_924" name="note_924">924.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Credner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 236 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; E. B. Tylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Culture</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> ii. 297 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Fr. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Textes et Monuments</span></span>, i. 342, 355 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Th. Mommsen, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Pars prior, pp. 338 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Weihnachtsfest</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Bonn, 1911), pp. 348 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> A different explanation of Christmas has been put forward by Mgr. Duchesne. He shows that among the early Christians the death of Christ was commonly supposed to have fallen on the twenty-fifth of March, that day having been <span class="tei tei-q">“chosen arbitrarily, or rather suggested by its coincidence with the official equinox of spring.”</span> It would be natural to assume that Christ had lived an exact number of years on earth, and therefore that his incarnation as well as his death took place on the twenty-fifth of March. In point of fact the Church has placed the Annunciation and with it the beginning of his mother's pregnancy on that very day. If that were so, his birth would in the course of nature have occurred nine months later, that is, on the twenty-fifth of December. Thus on Mgr. Duchesne's theory the date of the Nativity was obtained by inference from the date of the Crucifixion, which in its turn was chosen because it coincided with the official equinox of spring. Mgr. Duchesne does not notice the coincidence of the vernal equinox with the festival of Attis. See his work, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origines du Culte Chrétien</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> (Paris, 1903), pp. 261-265, 272. The tradition that both the conception and the death of Christ fell on the twenty-fifth of March is mentioned and apparently accepted by Augustine (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Trinitate</span></span>, iv. 9, Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xlii. 894).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_925" id="note_925" name="note_925">925.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg253">253</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_926" id="note_926" name="note_926">926.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">However, the lament for Adonis is mentioned by Ovid (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ars Amat.</span></span> i. 75 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) along with the Jewish observance of the Sabbath.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_927" id="note_927" name="note_927">927.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg268">268</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_928" id="note_928" name="note_928">928.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Columella, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De re rustica</span></span>, ix. 14. 1; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xviii. 246; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> i. 21. 10; L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span>, ii. 124.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_929" id="note_929" name="note_929">929.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. L. Duchesne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origines du Culte Chrétien</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 262 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> That Christ was crucified on the twenty-fifth of March in the year 29 is expressly affirmed by Tertullian (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Judaeos</span></span>, 8, vol. ii. p. 719, ed. F. Oehler), Hippolytus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentary on Daniel</span></span>, iv. 23, vol. i. p. 242, ed. Bonwetsch and Achelis), and Augustine (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, xviii. 54; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Trinitate</span></span>, iv. 9). See also <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Thesaurus Linguae Latinae</span></span>, iv. (Leipsic, 1906- 1909) col. 1222, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Crucimissio”</span>: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">fast. Mart 25 aequinoctium. principium veris. crucimissio gentilium. Christus passus hoc die.</i>”</span> From this last testimony we learn that there was a gentile as well as a Christian crucifixion at the spring equinox. The gentile crucifixion was probably the affixing of the effigy of Attis to the tree, though at Rome that ceremony appears to have taken place on the twenty-second rather than on the twenty-fifth of March. See above, p. 267. The Quartodecimans of Phrygia celebrated the twenty-fifth of March as the day of Christ's death, quoting as their authority certain acts of Pilate; in Cappadocia the adherents of this sect were divided between the twenty-fifth of March and the fourteenth of the moon. See Epiphanius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adversus Haeres.</span></span> l. 1 (vol. ii. p. 447, ed. G. Dindorf; Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, xli. 884 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). In Gaul the death and resurrection of Christ were regularly celebrated on the twenty-fifth and twenty-seventh of March as late as the sixth century. See Gregory of Tours, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Francorum</span></span>, viii. 31. 6 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, lxxi. 566); S. Martinus Dumiensis (bishop of Braga), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Pascha</span></span>, 1 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, lxxii. 50), who says: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">A plerisque Gallicanis episcopis usque ante non multum tempus custoditum est, ut semper VIII. Kal. April. diem Paschae celebrent, in quo facta Christi resurrectio traditur.</i>”</span> According to this last testimony, it was the resurrection, not the crucifixion, of Christ that was celebrated on the twenty-fifth of March; but Mgr. Duchesne attributes the statement to a mistake of the writer. With regard to the Roman practice the twenty-fifth and twenty-seventh of March are marked in ancient Martyrologies as the dates of the Crucifixion and Resurrection. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vetustius Occidentalis Ecclesiae Martyrologium</span></span>, ed. Franciscus Maria Florentinus (Lucca, 1667), pp. 396 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 405 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> On this subject Mgr. Duchesne observes: <span class="tei tei-q">“Hippolytus, in his Paschal Table, marks the Passion of Christ in a year in which the fourteenth of Nisan falls on Friday twenty-fifth March. In his commentary on Daniel he expressly indicates Friday the twenty-fifth of March and the consulship of the two Gemini. The Philocalien Catalogue of the Popes gives the same date as to day and year. It is to be noted that the cycle of Hippolytus and the Philocalien Catalogue are derived from official documents, and may be cited as evidence of the Roman ecclesiastical usage”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origines du Culte Chrétien</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 262).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_930" id="note_930" name="note_930">930.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. L. Duchesne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 263.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_931" id="note_931" name="note_931">931.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. L. Duchesne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span> A sect of the Montanists held that the world began and that the sun and moon were created at the spring equinox, which, however, they dated on the twenty-fourth of March (Sozomenus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Ecclesiastica</span></span>, vii. 18). At Henen-Su in Egypt there was celebrated a festival of the <span class="tei tei-q">“hanging out of the heavens,”</span> that is, the supposed reconstituting of the heavens each year in the spring (E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span>, ii. 63). But the Egyptians thought that the creation of the world took place at the rising of Sirius (Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De antro nympharum</span></span>, 24; Solinus, xxxii. 13), which in antiquity fell on the twentieth of July (L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span>, i. 127 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_932" id="note_932" name="note_932">932.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg263">263</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg281">281</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_933" id="note_933" name="note_933">933.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 324 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_934" id="note_934" name="note_934">934.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg246">246</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_935" id="note_935" name="note_935">935.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_936" id="note_936" name="note_936">936.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See below, vol. ii. pp. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_937" id="note_937" name="note_937">937.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg302">302</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_938" id="note_938" name="note_938">938.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Another instance of the substitution of a Christian for a pagan festival may be mentioned. On the first of August the people of Alexandria used to commemorate the defeat of Mark Antony by Augustus and the entrance of the victor into their city. The heathen pomp of the festival offended Eudoxia, wife of Theodosius the Younger, and she decreed that on that day the Alexandrians should thenceforth celebrate the deliverance of St. Peter from prison instead of the deliverance of their city from the yoke of Antony and Cleopatra. See L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span>, i. 154.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_939" id="note_939" name="note_939">939.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De mortibus persecutorum</span></span>, 2; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. Institut.</span></span> iv. 10. 18. As to the evidence of the Gallic usage see S. Martinus Dumiensis, quoted above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg307">307</a> note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_940" id="note_940" name="note_940">940.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The passage occurs in the 84th of the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaestiones Veteris et Novi Testamenti</span></span> (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, xxxv. 2279), which are printed in the works of Augustine, though internal evidence is said to shew that they cannot be by that Father, and that they were written three hundred years after the destruction of Jerusalem. The writer's words are as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“<i xml:lang="la">Diabolus autem, qui est satanas, ut fallaciae suae auctoritatem aliquam possit adhibere, et mendacia sua commentitia veritate colorare, primo mense quo sacramenta dominica scit celebranda, quia non mediocris potentiae est, Paganis quae observarent instituit mysteria, ut animas eorum duabus ex causis in errore detineret: ut quia praevenit veritatem fallacia, melius quiddam fallacia videretur, quasi antiquitate praejudicans veritati. Et quia in primo mense, in quo aequinoctium habent Romani, sicut et nos, ea ipsa observatio ab his custoditur; ita etiam per sanguinem dicant expiationem fieri, sicut et nos per crucem: hac versutia Paganos detinet in errore, ut putent veritatem nostram imitationem potius videri quam veritatem, quasi per aemulationem superstitione quadam inventam. Nec enim verum potest, inquiunt, aestimari quod postea est inventum. Sed quia apud nos pro certo veritas est, et ab initio haec est, virtutum atque prodigiorum signa perhibent testimonium, ut, teste virtute, diaboli improbitas innotescat.</i>”</span> I have to thank my learned friend Professor Franz Cumont for pointing out this passage to me. He had previously indicated and discussed it (<span class="tei tei-q">“La Polémique de l'Ambrosiaster contre les Païens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Revue d'Histoire et de Littérature religieuses</span></span>, viii. (1903) pp. 419 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). Though the name of Attis is not mentioned in the passage, I agree with Prof. Cumont in holding that the bloody expiatory rites at the spring equinox, to which the writer refers, can only be those of the Day of Blood which formed part of the great aequinoctial festival of Attis. Compare F. Cumont, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Religions Orientales dans le Paganisme Romain</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1909), pp. 106 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 333 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_941" id="note_941" name="note_941">941.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the decadence of Buddhism and its gradual assimilation to those popular Oriental superstitions against which it was at first directed, see Monier Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Buddhism</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1890), pp. 147 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_942" id="note_942" name="note_942">942.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The historical reality both of Buddha and of Christ has sometimes been doubted or denied. It would be just as reasonable to question the historical existence of Alexander the Great and Charlemagne on account of the legends which have gathered round them. The great religious movements which have stirred humanity to its depths and altered the beliefs of nations spring ultimately from the conscious and deliberate efforts of extraordinary minds, not from the blind unconscious co-operation of the multitude. The attempt to explain history without the influence of great men may flatter the vanity of the vulgar, but it will find no favour with the philosophic historian.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_943" id="note_943" name="note_943">943.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. F. Schömann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Alterthümer</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Berlin, 1897-1902), ii. 473; L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Mythologie</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (Berlin, 1894) pp. 248 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Greve, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Hyakinthos,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 2763 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Other views of Hyacinth have been expressed by G. F. Welcker (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Götterlehre</span></span>, Göttingen, 1857-1862, i. 472), G. F. Unger (<span class="tei tei-q">“Der Isthmientag und die Hyakinthien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Philologus</span></span>, xxxvii. (1877) pp. 20 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>), E. Rohde (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) and S. Wide (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lakonische Kulte</span></span>, Leipsic, 1893, p. 290).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_944" id="note_944" name="note_944">944.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 3. 3, iii. 10. 3; Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ther.</span></span> 901 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, with the Scholiast's note; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De saltatione</span></span>, 45; Pausanias, iii. 1. 3, iii. 19. 5; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chiliades</span></span>, i. 241 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 161-219; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxi. 66.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_945" id="note_945" name="note_945">945.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Theophrastus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histor. Plant.</span></span> vi. 8. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> That the hyacinth was a spring flower is plainly indicated also by Philostratus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Imag.</span></span> i. 23. 1) and Ovid (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> x. 162-166). See further Greve, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Hyakinthos,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 2764; J. Murr, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Pflanzenwelt in der griechischen Mythologie</span></span> (Innsbruck, 1890), pp. 257 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; O. Schrader, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reallexikon der Indogermanischen Altertumskunde</span></span> (Strasburg, 1901), pp. 383 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Miss J. E. Harrison was so kind as to present me with two specimens of the flower (<i xml:lang="la">Delphinium Ajacis</i>) on which the woful letters were plainly visible. A flower similarly marked, of a colour between white and red, was associated with the death of Ajax (Pausanias, i. 35. 4). But usually the two flowers were thought to be the same (Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> xiii. 394 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Scholiast on Theocritus, x. 28; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> xxi. 66; Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 557, p. 285).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_946" id="note_946" name="note_946">946.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Xenophon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hellenica</span></span>, iv. 5. 7-17; Pausanias, iii. 10. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_947" id="note_947" name="note_947">947.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 1. 3, iii. 19. 1-5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_948" id="note_948" name="note_948">948.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἑκατομβεύς; G. F. Unger in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Philologus</span></span>, xxxvii. (1877) pp. 13-33; Greve, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Hyakinthos,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 2762; W. Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 339. From Xenophon (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hellenica</span></span>, iv. 5) we learn that in 390 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> the Hyacinthian followed soon after the Isthmian festival, which that year fell in spring. Others, however, identifying Hecatombeus with the Attic month Hecatombaeon, would place the Hyacinthia in July (K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> Breslau, 1844, i. 358). In Rhodes, Cos, and other Greek states there was a month called Hyacinthius, which probably took its name from the Hyacinthian festival. The month is thought to correspond to the Athenian Scirophorion and therefore to June. See E. Bischof, <span class="tei tei-q">“De fastis Graecorum antiquioribus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Leipziger Studien für classische Philologie</span></span>, vii. (1884) pp. 369 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 381, 384, 410, 414 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> vol. i. pp. 396, 607, Nos. 614, note 3, 744, note 1. If this latter identification of the month is correct, it would furnish an argument for dating the Spartan festival of Hyacinth in June also. The question is too intricate to be discussed here.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_949" id="note_949" name="note_949">949.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athenaeus, iv. 17, pp. 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Strabo speaks (vi. 3. 2, p. 278) of a contest at the Hyacinthian festival. It may have been the chariot races mentioned by Athenaeus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_950" id="note_950" name="note_950">950.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Πολύβοια.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_951" id="note_951" name="note_951">951.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Rohde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_952" id="note_952" name="note_952">952.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 19. 3. The Greek word here used for sacrifice (ἐναγίζειν) properly denotes sacrifices offered to the heroic or worshipful dead; another word (θύειν) was employed for sacrifices offered to gods. The two terms are distinguished by Pausanias here and elsewhere (ii. 10. 1, ii. 11. 7). Compare Herodotus, ii. 44. Sacrifices to the worshipful dead were often annual. See Pausanias, iii. 1. 8, vii. 19. 10, vii. 20. 9, viii. 14. 11, viii. 41. 1, ix. 38. 5, x. 24. 6. It has been observed by E. Rehde (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 139, note 2) that sacrifices were frequently offered to a hero before a god, and he suggests with much probability that in these cases the worship of the hero was older than that of the deity.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_953" id="note_953" name="note_953">953.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 19. 14.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_954" id="note_954" name="note_954">954.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg044">44</a>; and below, vol. ii. pp. 213 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
					</dl>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
