<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Footnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes-1-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Footnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1-1-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strictly speaking, <i>nemus</i> is a natural opening or glade in a forest. Thus Lucan says (<i>Pharsal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 453 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) that the Druids inhabited “deep glades in sacred groves far from the haunts of men” (“<i>nemora alta remotis incolitis lucis</i>”), as the words are rendered by Haskins in his edition, who compares Propertius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 9. 24, “<i>lucus ubi umbroso fecerat orbe nemus.</i>” But commonly <i>nemus</i> means no more than a wood or grove. See for example Lucan, <i>Pharsal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 396, “<i>procumbunt nemora et spoliantur robora silvae.</i>” At Nemi the sacred grove (<i>lucus</i>) formed part of the woodlands (<i>nemus</i>), as we learn from Cato, quoted by Priscian, <i>Inst.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 21 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 129, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hertz), “<i>lucum Dianium in nemore Aricino</i>,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> As to the thick woods of Nemi in antiquity see Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 263 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 485.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cato, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 756; Statius, <i>Sylvae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1. 56; Philostratus, <i>Vita Apollonii</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 36. A loose expression of Appian (<i>Bellum Civile</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 24) has sometimes given rise to the notion that there was a town called Nemus. But this is a mistake. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Desjardins, <i>Essai sur la Topographie du Latium</i> (Paris, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 214, and on the other side, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bormann, <i>Altitalische Chorographie</i> (Halle, 1852), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 135 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The site was excavated in 1885 and 1886 by Sir John Savile Lumley, now Lord Savile, who was then English ambassador at Rome. Further excavations were conducted in 1886⁠–⁠1888 by Signor Luigi Boccanera, and again in 1895 by Signor Eliseo Borghi. See <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 192 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 227 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 254 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 317⁠–⁠321, 344, 428 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 478 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1887, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23⁠–⁠25, 120 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 195⁠–⁠198; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1888, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 392 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1889, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 20⁠–⁠22; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1895, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 106⁠–⁠108, 206, 232, 324, 424⁠–⁠438; <i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 149⁠–⁠157, 225⁠–⁠242; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lanciani, in the <i>Athenaeum</i>, October 10, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 477 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Pullan, in <i>Archaeologia: Miscellaneous Tracts relating to Antiquity</i>, l. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58⁠–⁠65; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, in <i>Verhandlungen der vierzigsten Versammlung deutscher Philologen und Schulmänner in Görlitz</i> (Leipzig, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147⁠–⁠164; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue of Classical Antiquities from the Site of the Temple of Diana, Nemi, Italy</i> (preface dated 1893). The temple measured 30 metres in length by 15.90 in breadth (<i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 193). It had columns on either side of the <i>pronaos</i> (Vitruvius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 7. 4). A few votive offerings found on the site in earlier times are described in Graevius’s <i>Thesaurus Antiquitatum Romanarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> col. 752⁠–⁠757, 808. For the inscriptions of Nemi and Aricia see <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. Nos. 2156⁠–⁠2226, 4180⁠–⁠4210, 4268⁠–⁠4275a; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Henzen, in <i>Hermes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1872) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6⁠–⁠13; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Tomassetti, in <i>Museo Italiano di Antichità Classica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1888) coll. 481 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Among these inscriptions the many dedications to Diana serve to identify the site beyond a doubt. The evidence of ancient writers is collected by Cluverius, <i>Italia Antiqua</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 920⁠–⁠935. See also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Nissen, <i>Italische Landeskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 588⁠–⁠592; and for the topography, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Gell, <i>The Topography of Rome and its Vicinity</i> (London, 1834), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 182⁠–⁠191, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 112⁠–⁠117.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Appian, <i>Bellum Civile</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 24.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Suetonius, <i>Divus Julius</i>, 54. Serving his own gods thus, he naturally felt no compunction at relieving the barbarous Gaulish gods of their little savings (Suetonius, <abbr>ibid.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Appian, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 267 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Juvenal, <i>Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 117 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Persius, <i>Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 56, with the scholiast’s note; Martial, <i>Epigr.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 19. 3, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 32. 10. Persius calls this part of the road the slope of Virbius. Juvenal and Martial call it the Arician slope. But the former was probably the correct name, for at Rome also there was a “slope of Virbius” on the Esquiline, near a sanctuary of Diana (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 48. 6). The double coincidence with Aricia is probably significant, as has been acutely pointed out by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 380, n. 3). We shall return to this later on. As to Virbius, we shall hear more of him presently.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Henzen, in <i>Hermes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1872) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6⁠–⁠12; <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., Nos. 2215, 2216, 2218.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At the place called <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Maria, in the commune of Nemi, there have been found remains of a magnificent villa of the first or second century, built in terraces just above the lake and adorned with variegated marbles, frescoes, and works of art. See <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1888, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194⁠–⁠196, 393 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The place is near the mouth of the ancient emissary, below the village of Genzano; the vineyards beside the lake are here littered with fragments of fine marbles. In January 1901 I visited the site in the company of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> Clair Baddeley, who has kindly furnished me with some notes on the subject.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <i>Ad Atticum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 4. 5.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Suetonius, <i>Divus Julius</i>, 46. From a letter of Cicero to Atticus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 1. 25) we infer that the house was building in 50 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some of the timbers and fittings of these vessels were fished up from the bottom of the lake in 1895. Especially remarkable are the beautiful bronze heads of lions and wolves with mooring-rings in their mouths. Caligula’s name (<b>C . CAESARIS . AVG . GERMANICI</b>) is stamped on the leaden water-pipes, and the style of the bronzes is that of the first century. See <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1895, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 361⁠–⁠396, 461⁠–⁠474; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C. G.</abbr> Boot, in <i>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der kon. Akademie van Wetenschappen, Afdeeling Letterkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> deel (Amsterdam, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278⁠–⁠285; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lanciani, <i>New Tales of Old Rome</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 205⁠–⁠214.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Historiae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 36.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., Nos. 2213, 2216, 4191. Hadrian also had a monument in the grove dedicated to him by the senate and people of Aricia (<i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1895, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 430 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). A bust of Caesar and a statue of Tiberius have been found on the spot. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, in <i>Verhandlungen der vierzigsten Versammlungen deutscher Philologen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 159.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Catullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span> 9 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bulletino dell’ Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1887, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 24, 195; id. 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 393; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, in <i>Verhandlungen der vierzigsten Versammlungen deutscher Philologen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 150 note, 161; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 15, 34 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1887, <abbr>p.</abbr> 195; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 393; <i>Bulletino di Corrispondenza Archeologica</i> 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 230; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 150 note, 151 note, 163; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35, 40. Greek hunters dedicated spears and javelins to Pan (<i>Anthologia Palatina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 57, 177). Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. D.</abbr> Rouse, <i>Greek Votive Offerings</i> (Cambridge, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 71.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Helbig, in <i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica</i> 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 231 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1887, <abbr>p.</abbr> 195; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 393. Helbig observes that the ancients sometimes used tridents in boar-hunts.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Epistulae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 6. In the second century of our era the mountains and oak woods of Greece harboured numbers of wild boars. See Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 32. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 20. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 6. 6, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 26. 10, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 23. 9, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 23. 7.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Roscoe, <i>Life and Pontificate of Leo the Tenth</i>,³ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 376.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3, 31, with the plate facing <abbr>p.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica</i> 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 153; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <i>Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 18 and 19.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i>Anabasis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 3. 4⁠–⁠13.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 35. 7.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i>Votive und Weihegaben des Katholischen Volks in Süddeutschland</i> (Brunswick, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37, 50, 152 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 41.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 41⁠–⁠50.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Hehn, <i>Kulturpflanzen und Haustiere in ihrem übergang aus Asien</i>⁷ (Berlin, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 520 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: “In the course of history the flora of the Italian peninsula assumed more and more a southern character. When the first Greeks landed in lower Italy the forests consisted predominantly of deciduous trees, the beeches reached lower down than now, when they are confined to the highest mountain regions. Centuries later in the landscapes on the walls of Pompeii we see nothing but evergreen trees, the <i>Laurus nobilis</i>, the olive, the cypress, the oleander; in the latest times of the empire and in the Middle Ages the lemon-trees and orange-trees appear, and since the discovery of America the magnolias, the agaves, and the Indian figs. There can be no question that this revolution has been wrought mainly by the hand of man.”<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>ξιφήρης οὖν ἐστιν ἀεί, περισκοπῶν τὰς ἐπιθέσεις, ἕτοιμος ἀμύνεσθαι, is Strabo’s description (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 3. 12), who may have seen him “pacing there alone.”<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i>Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 293.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 136, “<i>Licet de hoc ramo hi qui de sacris Proserpinae scripsisse dicuntur, quiddam esse mysticum adfirment, publica tamen opinio hoc habet. Orestes post occisum regem Thoantem</i>,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 116; Valerius Flaccus, <i>Argonautica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 304 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 3. 12; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 27. 4; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 11; Suetonius, <i>Caligula</i>, 35. The custom of breaking the branch, and its supposed connection with the Golden Bough of Virgil, are recorded by Servius alone (on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 136). For the title “King of the Wood” see Suetonius, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; and compare Statius, <i>Sylv.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1. 55 <abbr>sq.</abbr>⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Jamque dies aderat, profugis cum regibus aptum</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fumat Aricinum Triviae nemus”;</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 271 <abbr>sq.</abbr>⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Regna tenent fortesque manu, pedibusque fugaces;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Et perit exemplo postmodo quisque suo”;</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued"><abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Ars am.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 259 <abbr>sq.</abbr>⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Ecce suburbanae templum nemorale Dianae,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i>Partaque per gladios</i> regna <i>nocente manu</i>”;</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">Valerius Flaccus, <i>Argonauticaca</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 304 <abbr>sq.</abbr>⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Jam nemus Egeriae, jam te ciet altus ab alba</span>
							<br/>
							<span><i>Juppiter et soli non mitis Aricia</i> regi.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p class="continued">An archaic Greek relief, found in 1791 near the outlet of the lake, in the Vallericcia, has been sometimes thought to portray the combat between a priest and a candidate for the office. But the subject is rather the murder of Aegisthus by Orestes in presence of Clytaemnestra and Electra. See Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Gell, <i>Topography of Rome</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 116 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Jahn, in <i>Archäologische Zeitung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1849) coll. 113⁠–⁠118; Baumeister’s <i>Denkmäler</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1112; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 148 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lanciani, <i>New Tales of Old Rome</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 204.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus there have been found many models of the organs of generation, both male and female, including wombs; figures of women with infants on their laps or on their arms; and couples seated side by side, the woman pregnant or carrying a child. See <i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrisp. Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 160, 254; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1895, <abbr>p.</abbr> 424; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 160; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 15, 17. Another group represents a woman just after delivery, supported by the midwife, who holds the child in her lap. See Graevius, <i>Thesaurus Antiquitatum Romanarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> col. 808. As to the huntress Diana, see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p006" title="to page 6">6</a>.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Statius, <i>Sylvae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1. 52⁠–⁠60; Gratius Faliscus, <i>Cynegeticon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 484 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to the date we know from the calendars (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warde Fowler, <i>The Roman Festivals of the Republic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 198) and from Festus (<abbr>p.</abbr> 343 <abbr>ed.</abbr> Müller; compare Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i> 100) that the festival of Diana on the Aventine at Rome fell on the Ides, that is, the 13th of August. Further, the Ides of August was held as the birthday of Diana at Lanuvium (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 2112; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Wilmanns, <i>Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 319; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Bruns, <i>Fontes Juris Romani</i>,⁷ <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Gradenwitz, <abbr>p.</abbr> 389; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 7212). Moreover, Martial (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 67. 2) and Ausonius (<i>De feriis Romanis</i>, 5 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) speak of the Ides of August as Diana’s day. Hence we may safely conclude that the <i>Hecateias idus</i> which Statius (<abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>) mentions as the date of the festival of Diana at Nemi were no other than the Ides of August, all the more that the poet describes the time as the hottest of the year. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Wissowa, <i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i> (Munich, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 150 note, 161. A coin of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Clodius Turrinus (43 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>) portrays Diana with a long torch in either hand. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Babelon, <i>Monnaies de la République Romaine</i> (Paris, 1885), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 355.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 269 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 24. (30) 9 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Paley.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 193 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrisp. Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 157; <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 393; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 24⁠–⁠26.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the dedication of burning lamps and candles in antiquity, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. P.</abbr> Nilsson, <i>Griechische Feste</i> (Leipzig, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 345, note 5. As to the derivation of the Catholic from the old heathen custom, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i>Votive und Weihegaben des Katholischen Volks in Süddeutschland</i> (Brunswick, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 77.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 2213; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Wilmanns, <i>Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1767; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae Selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3243.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 478; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 158; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The true character of this circular basement was first pointed out by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 376). Previous writers had taken it for an altar or a pedestal. But the mosaic pavement and the bases of two columns which were found in position on it exclude the hypothesis of an altar and cannot easily be reconciled with that of a pedestal, for which, moreover, it appears to be too large. A rainwater gutter runs round it and then extends in the direction of the larger temple. As to the temple of Vesta at Rome see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Middleton, <i>The Remains of Ancient Rome</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 297 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Richter, <i>Topographie der Stadt Rom</i>² (Munich, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 88 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Boni, in <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, May 1900, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 30.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.² 336.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Juvenal, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 60 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Asconius, <i>In Milonianam</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Kiesseling and Schoell; Symmachus, <i>Epistulae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 128 and 129 (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> col. 355); <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 2172, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 4120; Wilmanns, <i>Exempla Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1750. The Alban Vestals gave evidence at Milo’s trial in 52 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> (Asconius, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>); one of them was tried for breaking her vow of chastity late in the fourth century <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> (Symmachus, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., Nos. 3677, 3679.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 296; Macrobius, <i>Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 4. 11.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Statius, <i>Sylvae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1. 55 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Gratius Faliscus, <i>Cynegeticon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 483⁠–⁠492.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris, <i>The Annotators of the Codex Bezae</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 93⁠–⁠102.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 324 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of Sacred Literature and Biblical Record</i>, New Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (London, 1865), “The Departure of my Lady Mary from this World,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 153. The Greek original of the treatise was discovered by Tischendorf. This passage was kindly indicated to me by my learned friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris. He writes to me: “In these late Syrian calendars the festivals are simply taken over from the Greek and Roman calendars without any adjustment at all, as a study of the detailed saints’ days shows.”<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Johanni Apostoli de transitu Beatae Mariae Virginis Liber</i>: ex recensione et cum interpretatione Maximiliani Engeri (Elberfeldae, 1854), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101, 103. This and the preceding passage are both cited by the late <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Lucius in his book <i>Die Anfänge des Heiligenkultes in der christlichen Kirche</i> (Tübingen, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 488 sq., 521. From them and from the entries in the Syrian calendars (see the next note), Lucius rightly inferred that the Assumption of the Virgin Mary had been assigned by the Church to the 15th of August with reference to the ripening of the grapes and other fruits, and that the Christian festival replaced an old heathen festival of first-fruits, which must have been held about the same time. But he appears to have overlooked the occurrence of Diana’s festival on the 13th of August.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Nilles, <i>Kalendarium Manuale utriusque Ecclesiae Orientalis et Occidentalis</i>² (Innsbruck, 1896⁠–⁠7), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249, 480. Professor Nilles compares the blessing of the herbs (<i>Krautweihe</i>), which still takes place in various parts of German-speaking lands on August 15th for the purpose of defeating the charms of witches.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Schmidt, <i>Das Volksleben der Neugriechen</i> (Leipzig, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 58. My learned friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. D.</abbr> Rouse, who is well acquainted with Greece, both ancient and modern, gave me similar information.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pauly-Wissowa, <i>Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Wissenschaften</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1342; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 18. 12; Xenophon, <i>Anabasis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 3. 12. On the other hand the very sight of the image of Artemis at Pellene was said to render trees barren and to blight the fruits of the earth. See Plutarch, <i>Aratus</i>, 32.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Dieterich, “Sommertag,” <i>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1905) Beiheft, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 108 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, with fig. 2.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Furtwängler, <i>Die antiken Gemmen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 231, with plates <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> 66, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span> 18, 26, 30, 32, all cited by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 378, note 4. Furtwängler held that these gems portray Diana of Nemi herself.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Catullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span> 17 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Pitrè, <i>Spettacoli e Feste popolari Siciliane</i> (Palermo, 1881), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 356, 358, 360, 361, 362; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Finamore, <i>Credenze, Usi e Costumi Abruzzesi</i> (Palermo, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 176; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Amalfi, <i>Tradizioni ed Usi nella peninsola Sorrentina</i> (Palermo, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 50.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Olaus Magnus, <i>Historia de Gentium Septentrionalium variis conditionibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 9.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Note of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. C.</abbr> Conybeare.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 8. 12, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 14. 16, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 3. 37.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is inferred from entries in the ancient Celtic calendar of which numerous fragments, engraved on bronze, were found in 1897 at Coligny near Lyons. In this calendar the month Rivros seems to mean “the harvest month” and to correspond to August. Sir John Rhys believes that the harvest-god Rivos, who is only known from this calendar, answers to the better-known Celtic god Lug. See Sir John Rhys, in <i>Transactions of the Third International Congress for the History of Religion</i> (Oxford, 1908), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 222 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; and as to the Coligny calendar in general see further Sir John Rhys, “Celtae and Galli,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the British Academy, 1905⁠–⁠1906</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 71 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> “Notes on the Coligny Calendar,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the British Academy</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dedications to Juno and Venus have been found in the grove (<i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 393; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44), also a bronze statuette of Jupiter (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 162), and a mutilated or unfinished bust supposed to represent that deity (<i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 344; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 54).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 762 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 273 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 482 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 3. 12. As to the stream, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Rosa, in <i>Monumenti ed Annali pubblica dall’Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica nel 1856</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 7; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lanciani, in <i>Athenaeum</i>, October 10, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 477. The water was diverted some years ago to supply Albano.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 77, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 273 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 482 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Cicero, <i>De legibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1. 4; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 19. 5, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 21. 3; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 4, 8, 13, 15; Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Antiquitates Romanae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 60 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Juvenal, <i>Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 12; Lactantius, <i>Divinarum Institutionum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 22; Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 35; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 763. Ovid, Livy, Lactantius, and Augustine speak of Egeria as the wife of Numa, whereas Juvenal and Servius call her his mistress. The language of Plutarch is somewhat ambiguous, but he uses the phrase γάμων θείων ἠξιωμένος (c. 4).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 4.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Juvenal, <i>Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 10 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 21. 3. As to the position of this grove and spring see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Gilbert, <i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 109 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 152 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Richter, <i>Topographie der Stadt Rom</i>² (Munich, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 342 <abbr>sq.</abbr> According to the latter writer, the valley of Egeria was outside the Servian wall, at the foot of the Caelian Mount, and is now traversed by the streets Via delle Mole di <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Sisto and Via della Ferratella. He identifies the sacred spring with a copious source at the Villa Fonseca. On the other hand, Statius (<i>Sylvae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 3. 290 <abbr>sq.</abbr>), Lactantius (<i>Divinarum Institutionum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 22), and Servius (on Virgil, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 763) held that Numa’s Egeria was not at Rome but at Nemi. The grove of Egeria is now popularly identified with a little wood called the <i>Bosco Sacro</i>, which stands in a commanding situation to the left of the Appian Way, about a mile and a half from Rome (Baedeker’s <i>Central Italy and Rome</i>,¹³ <abbr>p.</abbr> 378).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 13. That they carried the water in pitchers on their heads may be inferred from Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 4. 15 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 11⁠–⁠14.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the view of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Schwegler (<i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 548 note), <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Gilbert (<i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 111), and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Wissowa (in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griechischen und römische Mythologie</i>, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Egeria”).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 151. “The old bath” is mentioned in an inscription found on the spot (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 4190).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 192, 254; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> 193; <i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrisp. Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 153, 154 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 160; <i>Archaeologia: or Miscellaneous Tracts relating to Antiquity</i>, l. (1887), Pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 64; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 2, 4, 22. Amongst these models may be specially noted the torso of a woman clad in a long robe, with her breast cut open so as to expose the bowels. It may be the offering of a woman who suffered from some internal malady.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For an example of the custom in modern times see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J.</abbr> Blunt, <i>Vestiges of Ancient Manners and Customs discoverable in Modern Italy and Sicily</i> (London, 1823), <abbr>p.</abbr> 135. The custom is still widespread among the Catholic population of Southern Germany. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i>Votive und Weihegaben des Katholischen Volks in Süddeutschland</i> (Brunswick, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 112 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 123 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lanciani, in <i>Athenaeum</i>, October 10, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 477.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i>Cyneget.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 2 and 11; Euripides, <i>Hippolytus</i>, 10⁠–⁠19. 1092 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Euripides, <i>Hippolytus</i>, 20 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Apollodorus, <i>Epitoma</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 18 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Wagner; Hyginus, <i>Fabulae</i>, 47; Ovid, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 497 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 761 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, with the commentary of Servius; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 263 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 735 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 497 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Scholiast on Persius, <i>Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 56, <abbr>p.</abbr> 347 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Jahn; Lactantius, <i>Divinarum Institutionum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 17; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 27. 4; Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 10. 3; Scholiast on Pindar, <i>Pythian</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 96. It was perhaps in his character of a serpent that Aesculapius was said to have brought the dead Hippolytus to life. See my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 10. 3.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>An inscription in the public museum at Naples mentions a <i>flamen Virbialis</i> (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 1493). Another inscription mentions a similar priesthood at Aricia, but the inscription is forged (Orelli, <i>Inscript. Latin.</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 1457; compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Dessau on <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 2213). The same title <i>flamen Virbialis</i> has sometimes been wrongly read in an inscription of Gratianopolis, in Narbonensian Gaul (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 2238; Orelli, <i>Inscript. Latin.</i> Nos. 2212, 4022). For the worship of Virbius we have also the testimony of Servius, on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 776: “<i>Nam et Virbius inter deos colitur.</i>”<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 779 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 265 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 776. Helbig proposed to identify as Virbius some bronze statuettes found at Nemi, which represent a young man naked except for a cloak thrown over his left arm, holding in his extended right hand a shallow bowl, while in his raised left hand he seems to have held a spear or staff on which he leaned. See <i>Bulletino dell’Instituto di Corrisp. Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 229. But to this it has been objected by Rossbach (<abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 162) that Virbius appears to have been portrayed as an older, probably bearded man (Ovid, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 538 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 761; compare <abbr>id.</abbr> on <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 84. See also Ovid, <i>Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 545 <abbr>sq.</abbr>⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Hoc nemus inde colo de disque minoribus unus</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Nomine sub dominae lateo atque accenseor illi.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Ribadeneira, <i>Flos Sanctorum</i> (Venice, 1763), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 93 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Acta Sanctorum</i>, August 13, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (Paris and Rome, 1867). The merit of tracing the saint’s pedigree belongs to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris. See his <i>Annotators of Codex Bezae</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Prudentius has drawn a picture of the imaginary martyrdom which might melt the stoniest heart (<i>Peristeph.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 282 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Th. Obbarius). According to the <i>Acta Sanctorum</i> the saint shared the crown of martyrdom with twenty members of his household, of whom nineteen were beheaded, while one of them, his nurse <i>Concordia</i>, was scourged to death (“<i>plumbatis caesa</i>”). It is an odd coincidence that his Greek prototype Hippolytus dedicated just twenty horses to Aesculapius (Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 27. 4); and it is another odd coincidence, if it is nothing worse, that the bones of Orestes, the other mythical hero of Nemi, were buried beside the temple of <i>Concordia</i> in Rome, and that Servius, who mentions this tradition (on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 116), should immediately afterwards quote the words “<i>virgine caesa</i>.” If we knew why the hero Hippolytus dedicated just twenty horses to the god who raised him from the dead, we might perhaps know why the saint Hippolytus went to heaven attended by a glorious company of just twenty martyrs. Bunsen courageously stood out for the historical reality of the martyr, whom he would fain identify with his namesake the well-known writer of the third century (<i>Hippolytus and his Age</i>, London, 1852, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cato, <i>Origines</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>., quoted by Priscian, <i>Inst.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 21, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 129, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Hertz; <i><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Catonis praeter librum de re rustica quae extant</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Jordan, <abbr>p.</abbr> 12.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 25; Dionysius Halicarnas. <i>Antiquitates Romanae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 29.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Persius, <i>Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 55 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wissowa suggests that Manius Egerius was a half-forgotten male counterpart of Egeria (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griechischen und römische Mythologie</i>, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Egeria”); and Dessau observes that the name Egerius “<i>sine dubio cohaeret cum Egerio fonte</i>” (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 204). The same view is taken by <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Pais. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook holds that the original form of the names was Aegerius and Aegeria, which he would interpret as “the Oak God” and “the Oak Goddess.” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, “The European Sky-God,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 291 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Pais, <i>Ancient Legends of Roman History</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 142.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As Cluverius seems to do (<i>Italia Antiqua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 931).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is substantially the view of <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Wissowa, who holds that the reference is to the foundation of a common altar in the grove by all the members of the league (<i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 199).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholars are not agreed as to whether the list of confederate Latin cities in Cato is complete, and whether the Latin dictator he mentions was the head of the league or only of Tusculum. In regard to the former question we must remember that the passage of Cato is known to us only from Priscian, who seems to have quoted no more than suited his purpose, which was merely to illustrate a grammatical termination (<i>Ardeatis</i> for the later <i>Ardeas</i>). Probably, therefore, the original passage contained many more names of towns which Priscian did not think it needful to cite. This is the view of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Dessau (in <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 204). With regard to the second question, Mommsen held that the dictatorship in question was merely the chief magistracy of Tusculum, the presidency of the Latin league being vested in two praetors, not in a dictator (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 3. 9). Most scholars, however, appear to be of opinion that the dictator referred to was head of the league. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Jordan, <i><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Catonis praeter librum de re rustica quae extant</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Beloch, <i>Der italische Bund unter Roms Hegemonie</i> (Leipzig, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 188; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Nissen, <i>Italische Landeskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 557 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5, 36; <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 4186.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bulletino di Corrisp. Archeologica</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 232; <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 255, 320; <abbr>id.</abbr> 1895, <abbr>p.</abbr> 108; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5, 55. The use of this rude currency is said to have been superseded in the reign of Servius Tullius, who substituted stamped ingots of copper (Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span> 43).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span> 11. 9; Tacitus, <i>Historiae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 53; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Babelon, <i>Monnaies de la République romaine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 103; Euripides, <i>Iphigenia in Tauris</i>, 38 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 4. 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 308; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 16. 7⁠–⁠10; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K. O.</abbr> Müller, <i>Die Dorier</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 385 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 32. 1; Euripides, <i>Hippolytus</i>, 1423⁠–⁠1430, with Paley’s comment. Diodorus Siculus speaks (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 62) of the “godlike honours” accorded to Hippolytus at Troezen.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 22. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 32. 1.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Wide, <i>De sacris Troezeniorum, Hermionensium, Epidauriorum</i> (Upsala, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 86 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Boetticher thought that “the whole legend of Hippolytus represents simply the conflict of the worship of Aphrodite with that of Artemis at Troezen” (<i>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 445, n. 2).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 32. 3.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 72; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 24. 7. As to the myrtle and Aphrodite, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Boetticher, <i>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 444 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Hehn, <i>Kulturpflanzen und Haustiere</i>⁷ (Berlin, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 220 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 22. 1; Euripides, <i>Hippolytus</i>, 30 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, with the scholiast’s note; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 62; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Tzetzes, <i>Scholia on Lycophron</i>, 1329.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 32. 6 Ἀφροδίτης Ἀσκραίας, where Bekker and all subsequent editors have changed Ἀσκραίας into Ἀκραίας. But Ἀσκραίας has the better manuscript authority. The title is derived from <i>askra</i>, “a fruitless oak” (Hesychius, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> ἄσκρα). See <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>, (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 415 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 32. 10. In Greek <i>saronis</i> is a hollow oak. See Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Zeus</i>, 22; Hesychius and <i>Etymologicum Magnum</i>, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> σαρωνίδες; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 370. Mythology derived the name Saronian from a certain Saron, an ancient king of Troezen and a mighty hunter, who had been drowned while swimming after a doe (Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 30. 7). In this mythical hunter associated with Artemis we may perhaps detect a duplicate of Hippolytus.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 31. 4, 8, and 9.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Kühner-Blass, <i>Grammatik der griechischen Sprache</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 288 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 27. 4.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 33. 2 with my commentary, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 285 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 596 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 1. 4, 8, and 9, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212, 214 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to the topography, see Bunbury in Smith’s <i>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography</i>, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Timavus”; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Nissen, <i>Italische Landeskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 233. I have to thank my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Cook for drawing my attention to the association of the horse and wolf in the early cults of Greece and Italy.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Salomon Reinach would explain Hippolytus at Troezen as a sacred horse, which was torn to pieces by his worshippers at a solemn sacrifice, just as Dionysus Zagreus was said to have been rent in pieces by his worshippers. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Reinach, “Hippolyte,” <i>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 47⁠–⁠60; <abbr>id.</abbr> <i>Cultes, Mythes, et Religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Paris, 1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 54⁠–⁠67.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>No argument can be drawn from the bronze wolf-heads of Caligula’s ships (above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p005" title="to page 5">5</a>, note 5), since these may have been purely ornamental.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i>De dea Syria</i>, 60.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Theseus</i>, 5.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span> 83, <abbr>p.</abbr> 605<b>A</b>. For dedications of hair to Apollo see <i>Anthologia Palatina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 198, 279.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Statius, <i>Theb.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 253 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 43. 4.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 33 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Delos</i>, 291 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 43. 4.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Anthologia Palatina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 276, 277; Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 38; Hesychius, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> γάμων ἔθη. Pollux seems to imply that the hair was dedicated to Hera and the Fates as well as to Artemis.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Deschamps and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Cousin, in <i>Bulletin de Correspondance hellénique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 390 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 249 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 479⁠–⁠490.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i>De dea Syria</i>, 60.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marquardt, <i>Privatleben der Römer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 599 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Suetonius, <i>Nero</i>, 12. On hair-offerings in general see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i>Ueber das Haaropfer</i> (Amsterdam, 1886) (reprinted from the <i>Revue Coloniale Internationale</i>). On the hair-offerings of the Greeks see <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Wieseler, in <i>Philologus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1854), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 711⁠–⁠715; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Deschamps and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Cousin, in <i>Bulletin de Correspondance hellénique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 479⁠–⁠490; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. D.</abbr> Rouse, <i>Greek Votive Offerings</i> (Cambridge, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 240⁠–⁠245.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 65; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 83. The latter writer’s account is the fuller, and has been followed in the text.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i>De dea Syria</i>, 6.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i>Religion of the Semites</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 329. He refers to Sozomenus, <i>Histor. Eccles.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 10. 7; Socrates, <i>Histor. Eccles.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 18; and Eusebius, <i>Vita Constant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 58, from whose testimonies we learn that at Heliopolis, in Syria, it was the custom to prostitute maidens to strangers before marriage. Eusebius speaks of the religious prostitution of married women as well as of maidens. Constantine destroyed the temple of the goddess in which these impure rites seem to have been performed. To moderns, Heliopolis (the City of the Sun) is better known as Baalbec; its magnificent ruins are the finest remains of Greek architecture in the East.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is recognised by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken (<i>Ueber das Haaropfer</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 105).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i>Das Haaropfer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i>Religion of the Semites</i>,² <abbr>pp.</abbr> 323 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Goldziher, <i>Muhammedanische Studien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Halle a. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> 1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 247 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> See also below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p102" title="to page 102">102</a>.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 41. 3. To the references given in my note on the passage add Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 30.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Delos</i>, 278 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 91; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 1. 15, <abbr>p.</abbr> 264; Plutarch, <i>De Pythiae oraculis</i>, 16. In Apollo’s temple at Delphi there were dedicated a radish of gold, a beet of silver, and a turnip of lead, which was thought to signify the respective value of these vegetables (Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 86). A poet speaks of tithes and first-fruits hung up for Apollo on a high pillar at Delphi (Clement of Alexandria, <i>Stromateis</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 24. 164, <abbr>p.</abbr> 419, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Potter).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diogenes Laertius, <i>Vitae Philosophorum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 44, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 2; Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Convivales</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 1. 2; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Wood, <i>Discoveries at Ephesus: Inscriptions from the great Theatre</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 16. Apollo’s birthday (the 7th of Thargelion) was probably the festival known in the Delian calendar as the Apollonia, not the Delia as was formerly supposed. The Delia seems to have fallen in early spring, not in early summer. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Robert in <i>Hermes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161⁠–⁠169; <abbr>Aug.</abbr> Mommsen, <i>Feste der Stadt Athen</i> (Leipzig, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 451. On this harvest-festival at Delos see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 232 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, who, however, took the festival to be the Delia.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hesiod, <i>Works and Days</i>, 383 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Ideler, <i>Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 242.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 518. As to the season of the ripening of the corn in Greece both in ancient and modern times, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Busolt’s discussion of the evidence, <i>Griechische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 2 (Gotha, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 909 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, note.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Philostratus, <i>Heroica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span> 24.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bulletin de Correspondance hellénique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1894) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 87⁠–⁠93; <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 639⁠–⁠641; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Curtius in <i>Archäologischer Anzeiger</i>, 1895, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 109 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² Nos. 611, 665, 718.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 2. 11, <abbr>p.</abbr> 404.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Aristides</i>, 20. Probably the custom of sending out new fire from Delos and Delphi was common, though the existing evidence of it is scanty. The same remark applies to the practice of bringing tithes of the harvest to these sanctuaries.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 33; Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Delos</i>, 278 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Herodotus does not tell us in what the sacred offerings consisted; Pausanias says (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 31. 2) that no one knew what they were. But from the evidence of Callimachus, compared with that of Pliny (<i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 91) and Mela (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 37), it appears that they were believed to be the first-fruits of the corn.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Stein on Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 33; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Crusius in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griechischen und römische Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 2813, 2831; Preller-Robert, <i>Griechische Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 298 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Wernicke, in Pauly-Wissowa, <i>Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> coll. 1355, 1356, 1357, 1358, 1359, 1380, 1383, 1393, 1402. The names of the maidens were variously given as Hyperoche and Laodice (Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 33), or Hekaerge and Opis, (Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 43. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 7. 8; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 532), or Upis, Loxo, and Hekaerge (Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Delos</i>, 292). Herodotus further mentions (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 35) another pair of Hyperborean maidens, Arge and Opis by name, who came with Apollo and Artemis to Delos, and were buried behind the sanctuary of Artemis in the island. They are clearly the equivalents of the Hekaerge and Opis or Upis of the other writers. For Hekaerge as an epithet of Artemis see Servius, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; Clement of Alexandria, <i>Stromateis</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 8. 49, <abbr>p.</abbr> 674, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Potter, quoting Apollodorus of Corcyra: μέλπετε ὧ παῖδες ἑκάεργον καὶ ἑκαέργαν. For Opis or Upis as a name of Artemis see Macrobius, <i>Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 22. 3⁠–⁠6; Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Artemis</i>, 204; Palaephatus, <i>De incredib.</i> 32.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pseudo-Plato, <i>Axiochus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 371<b>A</b>; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 532: “<i>Alii putant Opim et Hecaergon nutritores Apollinis et Dianae fuisse; hinc itaque Opim ipsam Dianam cognominatam, quod supra dictum est, Apollinem vero Hecaergon.</i>”<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 34 <abbr>sq.</abbr> According to Herodotus, each grave contained the dust of a pair of Hyperborean damsels.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Porphyry, <i>Vita Pythagorae</i>, 16.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wernicke, in Pauly-Wissowa’s <i>Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1339. This general statement the writer supports with a wealth of detailed evidence, to which I can only refer the reader.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This appears from the name <i>Partheniai</i> applied at Sparta to the men who were born of the <i>parthenoi</i> (unmarried women) during the absence of the married men at the Messenian war. See Ephorus, cited by Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 3. 3, <abbr>p.</abbr> 279. Whether this explanation was historically correct or not (and other explanations of it were given, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. L.</abbr> Newman on Aristotle, <i>Politics</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.) 7, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1306 b 29), it proves that in Greek of the best period <i>parthenos</i> did not connote chastity. Compare what Herodotus says of the Thracians (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 6): τὰς δὲ παρθένους οὐ φυλάσσουσι, ἀλλ’ ἐῶσι τοῖσι αὐταὶ βούλονται ἀνδράσι μίσγεσθαι. As to the worship of unmarried goddesses in Western Asia, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. M.</abbr> Ramsay observes: “It is, in fact, probable, though with our present knowledge not susceptible of proof, that the term Parthenos in connection with the Anatolian system should be rendered simply as ‘the Unmarried,’ and should be regarded as evidence of the religious existence of the pre-Greek social system. The Parthenos goddess was also the Mother; and however much the Parthenoi who formed part of her official retinue may have been modified by Greek feeling, it is probable that originally the term indicated only that they were not cut off by marriage from the divine life” (<i>Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 96). Similarly in a celebrated passage of Isaiah (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 14) the Hebrew word (עַלְמָה) which is translated “virgin” in our English version means no more than “young woman.” A correct translation would have obviated the necessity for the miracle which so many generations of devout but unlearned readers have discovered in the text; for while it would unquestionably be a miracle if a virgin were to conceive and bear a son, there is nothing whatever miraculous or even unusual about a young woman doing so.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. R.</abbr> Farnell, <i>The Cults of the Greek States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 444. The whole of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Farnell’s treatment of this subject is excellent (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 442⁠–⁠449). He suggests doubtfully that the epithets <i>Peitho</i>, <i>Hegemone</i>, and <i>Eukleia</i> may possibly refer to marriage. But clearly “persuasion,” “leader,” and “good fame” do not in themselves imply any allusion to wedlock. The passage of Euripides referred to in the text is <i>Supplices</i>, 958 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: οὐδ’ Ἄρτεμις λοχία προσφθέγξαιτ’ ᾶν τὰς ἀτέκνους.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus she was identified with Anaitis (Plutarch, <i>Artoxerxes</i>, 27; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscr. Graec.</i>² <abbr>No.</abbr> 775), and with Nana (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 131), or Nanaea, the goddess of Elymais (2 Maccabees, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 13 and 15, compared with Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span> 11, and Josephus, <i>Antiquitates Judaicae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 9). This Nanaea was sometimes identified with Aphrodite instead of with Artemis (Appian, <i>Syriace</i>, 66). She seems to have been the old Babylonian goddess Nana, Nanai, or Nannaia, who was identical with the Ishtar (Astarte) of Erech. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Zimmern, in Schrader’s <i>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</i>,³ <abbr>p.</abbr> 422; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Harper, <i>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</i> (New York, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 116 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 245; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griechischen und römische Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 4 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Nana.” For the identification of Artemis with another Semitic mother-goddess, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i>Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia</i>² (London, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 298. As to the dissolute worship of Anaitis, see Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 14, 16, <abbr>p.</abbr> 532. And as to the identification of Artemis with Asiatic goddesses of this type see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. R.</abbr> Farnell, <i>Cults of the Greek States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 478 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Wernicke, in Pauly-Wissowa, <i>Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1369 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 31. 8; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscript. Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 656.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The statues on which this description is based are in the Vatican, the Lateran, and the Palazzo dei Conservatori on the Capitol at Rome. The first of these is figured and described in Baumeister’s <i>Denkmäler</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 130 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, and the second is described by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Benndorf and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Schoene, <i>Die antiken Bildwerke des Lateranischen Museums</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260 <abbr>sq.</abbr> See also Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griechischen und römische Myth.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 588 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Reinach, <i>Répertoire de la Statuaire grecque et romaine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 298, 299, 300, 302, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 321 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Both the Vatican and the Lateran statues have the necklace of acorns, and the Lateran copy (<abbr>No.</abbr> 768) has in addition a circlet of acorns hanging on the bosom. The acorns probably refer to the oak-tree under which the Amazons were said to have set up the image of the goddess at Ephesus (Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Artemis</i>, 237 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). The statue in the Palazzo dei Conservatori (<abbr>No.</abbr> 47) has serpents twined round the arms. The many breasts of the Ephesian Artemis are mentioned by Minucius Felix (<i>Octavius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span> 5). On the worship of the Ephesian Artemis continued as that of the Virgin Mary see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. M.</abbr> Ramsay, “The Worship of the Virgin Mary at Ephesus,” <i>The Expositor</i>, June 1905, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 401 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 23, <abbr>p.</abbr> 641. That a goddess of fertility should be served by such ministers may strike us as a contradiction. Yet it is typical of the Oriental worship of the great Mother Goddess. I have suggested an explanation of the custom elsewhere. See <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 236 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 2. 7 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Preller-Robert, <i>Griechische Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 329; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. R.</abbr> Farnell, <i>The Cults of the Greek States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 480 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Indeed the eloquent church father Lactantius let the cat out of the bag when he bluntly called Hippolytus the lover of Artemis (<i>Divinarum Institutionum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 17).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 82⁠–⁠87; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 30. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 32. 2; Scholia on Aristides, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 598 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Dindorf. As <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Stein (on Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 82) rightly observes, Damia and Auxesia were “goddesses of tilth and of the fruitful field, agrarian deities who were accordingly compared and identified with Demeter and Kora [Proserpine], but who were in truth only separate personifications of the two sides of Demeter’s character.” See further my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 30. 4. We shall return hereafter to the custom of stone-throwing as a charm to fertilise the fields.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, Catullus’s fine poem on her (No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was pointed out long ago by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Buttmann (<i>Mythologus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 151).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Seneca speaks of Diana as “<i>regina nemorum</i>” or “Queen of the Woods” (<i>Hippolytus</i>, 406), perhaps with a reminiscence of the <i>Rex Nemorensis</i>, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook has suggested (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 373, note 4).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 242, pointed out to me by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, who compares Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 31.<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 56 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 100 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 316 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the double-headed bust see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Helbig, in <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, 1885, <abbr>p.</abbr> 227; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Rossbach, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 159; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Wallis, <i>Illustrated Catalogue of Classical Antiquities from the Site of the Temple of Diana, Nemi</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, in <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 373; <abbr>id.</abbr> “The European Sky-God,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 289 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Granger, “A Portrait of the Rex Nemorensis,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194⁠–⁠197; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1908) <abbr>p.</abbr> 217; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer, “The Leafy Bust at Nemi,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147⁠–⁠149. The interpretation adopted in the text is that of Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Granger. The way had been prepared for it by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook’s suggestion that the busts represent “the double form of Diana’s favourite, Hippolytus-Virbius.” Previous writers took the view that the heads were those of water-gods. As to the identification of the leaves on the busts, about which botanists are not agreed, see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Francis Darwin’s letter to me, quoted in my article, “The Leafy Bust at Nemi” (<abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.² 321 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Kings of the Sacred Rites are known from inscriptions to have existed at Lanuvium, Bovillae, and Tusculum. See <i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>., Nos. 2089, 2413, 2634. At Rome the Sacrificial King held office for life (Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Antiquitates Romanae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 74. 4).<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plato, <i>Politicus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 290 <b>E</b>; Aristotle, <i>Constitution of Athens</i>, 57; Lysias, <i>Or.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 4; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Gilbert, <i>Handbuch der griechischen Staatsalterthümer</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 281 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristotle, <i>Politics</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>.) 8. 20, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1322 b 26 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Gilbert, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 323 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Schömann, <i>Griechische Alterthümer</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 145 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 423 sq.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 616; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil d’Inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 716.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Cauer, <i>Delectus Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 431, lines 46 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Another inscription in the same collection (<abbr>No.</abbr> 428) also refers to the kings of Mytilene. Both inscriptions are printed in Ch. Michel’s <i>Recueil</i>, Nos. 356, 357.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 570; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 707.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Cauer, <i>Delectus Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 496; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1383.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Schömann, <i>Handbuch der griechischen Alterthümer</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 270 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Ziebarth, “Der Fluch im griechischen Recht,” <i>Hermes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 57⁠–⁠70; Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Harrison, <i>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion</i>² (Cambridge, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 138⁠–⁠145; and my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 2. 7. For example, the people of Teos cursed poisoners and all persons who hindered the importation of corn (Cauer, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> 480; Ch. Michel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> 1318). On the other hand, at Athens in the time of Solon public curses were levelled at all who exported anything but olive oil (Plutarch, <i>Solon</i>, 24). These particular curses may interest students of the history of free trade.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Graecae</i> 12. <abbr>Aug.</abbr> Mommsen (<i>Delphika</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 250 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) is probably right in comparing this ceremony with the swinging-festival (<i>Aiora</i>) at Athens, as to which see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 453 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum Graeciae Septentrionalis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 188, 223; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Schömann, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 146; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Gilbert, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 323 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 7. 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 384. In this passage the word βασιλέα is omitted in some editions, but has the authority of several <abbr>MSS.</abbr> (Strabo <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <abbr>p.</abbr> 998), and is probably right.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This was the case at Elis (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Roehl, <i>Inscriptiones Graecae antiquissimae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 112; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Cauer, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> 253; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Roberts, <i>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 292), in Cos (Dittenberger, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> 616), in Chios (<abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> 570), at Mytilene (Cauer, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> Nos. 428, 431), at Cyme (Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Graecae</i> 2), and perhaps in Siphnos (Isocrates, <i>Or.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 36). The Kings of Elis may have been the officials called <i>Basilai</i> who sacrificed on the top of Mount Cronius at Olympia at the spring equinox (Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 20. 1).<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 2. 1; Dionysius Halicarn., <i>Antiquitates Romanae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 74. 4.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristotle, <i>Politics</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 14. 13, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1285 b 14 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Demosthenes, <i>Contra Neaer.</i> § 74 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 1370; Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i> 63.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i>Repub. Lacedaem.</i> 15, compare <abbr>id.</abbr> 13; Aristotle, <i>Politics</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 14. 3, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1285 a 3 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Argos was governed, at least nominally, by a king as late as the time of the great Persian war (Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 149); and at Orchomenus, in the secluded highlands of Northern Arcadia, the kingly form of government persisted till towards the end of the fifth century <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> (Plutarch, <i>Parallela</i>, 32). As to the kings of Thessaly in the sixth and fifth centuries <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Hiller von Gaertringen in <i>Aus der Anomia</i> (Berlin, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠16.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 56.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> 1. 3, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 632 <abbr>sq.</abbr> These Ephesian kings, who probably held office for life, are not to be confounded with the purely priestly functionaries called Essenes or King Bees, whose tenure of office was annual. See below, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 135.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 162.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 3. 37, 5. 3; compare <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 4. 7, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 2. 3, 2. 6, 3. 31 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 3. 34, 8. 9, 8. 14. But see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopaedia Britannica</i>, 9th <abbr>ed.</abbr> art. “Priest,” <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 729.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 243.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the <i>Lî-Kî</i> (Legge’s translation), <i>passim</i> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i>History of Madagascar</i> (London, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.D.</abbr>), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 359 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 129.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 94. As to the ruins of Palenque, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i>Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 288 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Maler, “Mémoire sur l’état de Chiapa (Mexique),” <i>Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 327 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Croonenberghs, “La Mission du Zambèze,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 453.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 75.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1. 5.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris, <i>The Dioscuri in the Christian Legends</i> (London, 1903); <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>The Cult of the Heavenly Twins</i> (Cambridge, 1906). See also below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p262" title="to page 262">262</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr> With the Spartan custom we may compare the use which the Zulus made of twins in war. See Dudley Kidd, <i>Savage Childhood, a Study of Kafir Children</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 47 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: “In war time a twin used to be hunted out and made to go right in front of the attacking army, some few paces in front of the others. He was supposed to be fearless and wild. His twin, if a sister, and if surviving, was compelled to tie a cord very tightly round her loins during the fight, and had to starve herself; she was also expected to place the twin brother’s sleeping-mat in that part of the hut which the <i>itongo</i> [ancestral spirits] loved to haunt. This brought success in war. But the great chief Tshaka stopped this practice, for he said that the wild twin did foolhardy things and brought the army into needless danger.”<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 101; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 43; Seneca, <i>Natur. Quaestiones</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1. 13; Lucian, <i>Dialogi deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span> 2; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 720; Plutarch, <i>De defectu oraculorum</i>, 30; Lactantius Placidus, <i>Commentarios in Statii Theb.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 792; Th. Henri Martin, in <i>Revue Archéologique</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1866) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168⁠–⁠174; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <i>Légendes, Croyances et Superstitions de la Mer</i> (Paris, 1886), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 87⁠–⁠109. Seafaring men in different parts of the world still see and draw omens from these weird lights on the masts. See Edward FitzGerald, quoted in <i>County Folk-lore, Suffolk</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 121 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 279.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 101. Compare Seneca, <i>Natur. Quaestiones</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1. 14.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Potocki, <i>Voyages dans les Steps d’Astrakhan et du Caucase</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 143.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Antiquitates Romanae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 13; Cicero, <i>De natura deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 2. 6.<a href="chapter-1-2.xhtml#noteref-1-1-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The expression Homoeopathic Magic was first used, so far as I am aware, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Y.</abbr> Hirn (<i>Origins of Art</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 282). The expression Mimetic Magic was suggested by a writer in <i>Folk-lore</i> (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 65), whom I believe to be <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland. The expression Imitative Magic was used incidentally by me in the first edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 268).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That magic is based on a mistaken association of ideas was pointed out long ago by Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor (<i>Primitive Culture</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 116), but he did not analyse the different kinds of association.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It has been ingeniously suggested by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Y.</abbr> Hirn that magic by similarity may be reduced to a case of magic by contact. The connecting link, on his hypothesis, is the old doctrine of emanations, according to which everything is continually sending out in all directions copies of itself in the shape of thin membranes, which appear to the senses not only as shadows, reflections, and so forth, but also as sounds and names. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Y.</abbr> Hirn, <i>Origins of Art</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 293 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> This hypothesis certainly furnishes a point of union for the two apparently distinct sides of sympathetic magic, but whether it is one that would occur to the savage mind may be doubted.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the Greek and Roman practice, see Theocritus, <abbr>Id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>.; Virgil, <i>Eclogae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 75⁠–⁠82; Ovid, <i>Heroides</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 91 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> <i>Amores</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 7. 29 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Wünsch, “Eine antike Rachepuppe,” <i>Philologus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxi</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26⁠–⁠31.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Henry’s <i>Travels among the Northern and Western Indians</i>, quoted by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Jedediah Morse, <i>Report to the Secretary of War of the United States on Indian Affairs</i> (Newhaven, 1822), Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 102. I have not seen Henry’s book.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Jones, <i>History of the Ojebway Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Keating, <i>Narrative of an Expedition to the Source of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s River</i> (London, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 159; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Kohl, <i>Kitschi-Gami</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 80. Similar practices are reported among the Illinois, the Mandans, and the Hidatsas of North America (Charlevoix, <i>Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 88; Maximilian, Prinz zu Wied, <i>Reise in das Innere Nord-America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 188; Washington Matthews, <i>Ethnography and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 50), and the Aymaras of Bolivia and Peru (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Forbes, “On the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1870) <abbr>p.</abbr> 236).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 485 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p007" title="to page 7">7</a>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i>The Todas</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 458. Among the Kusavans or potters of Southern India “if a male or female recovers from cholera, smallpox, or other severe illness, a figure of the corresponding sex is offered. A childless woman makes a vow to offer up the figure of a baby, if she brings forth offspring. Figures of animals⁠—cattle, sheep, horses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>⁠—are offered at the temple when they recover from sickness, or are recovered after they have been stolen” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 192; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 349). The analogy of these offerings to the various votive figures found in the sanctuary of Diana at Nemi is obvious.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The meaning and origin of the name Viracocha, as applied by the Peruvians to the Spaniards, is explained with great frankness by the Italian historian <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Benzoni, who had himself travelled in America at the time of the conquest. He says (<i>History of the New World</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 252 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, Hakluyt Society): “When the Indians saw the very great cruelties which the Spaniards committed everywhere on entering Peru, not only would they never believe us to be Christians and children of God, as boasted, but not even that we were born on this earth, or generated by a man and born of a woman; so fierce an animal they concluded must be the offspring of the sea, and therefore called us <i>Viracocchie</i>, for in their language they call the sea <i>cocchie</i> and the froth <i>vira</i>; thus they think that we are a congelation of the sea, and have been nourished by the froth; and that we are come to destroy the world, with other things in which the Omnipotence of God would not suffice to undeceive them. They say that the winds ruin houses and break down trees, and the fire burns them; but the <i>Viracocchie</i> devour everything, they consume the very earth, they force the rivers, they are never quiet, they never rest, they are always rushing about, sometimes in one direction and sometimes in the other, seeking for gold and silver; yet never contented, they game it away, they make war, they kill each other, they rob, they swear, they are renegades, they never speak the truth, and they deprive us of our support. Finally, the Indians curse the sea for having cast such very wicked and harsh beings on the land. Going about through various parts of this kingdom I often met some natives, and for the amusement of hearing what they would say, I used to ask them where such and such a <i>Christian</i> was, when not only would they refuse to answer me, but would not even look me in the face: though if I asked them where such and such a <i>Viracocchie</i> was, they would reply directly.” An explanation of the name much more flattering to Spanish vanity is given by Garcilasso de la Vega, himself half a Spaniard (<i>Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 65 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, Hakluyt Society, Markham’s translation).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 570⁠–⁠572.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kreemer, “Regenmaken, Oedjoeng, Tooverij onder de Javanen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land-en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, “The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 399 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Cambridge, 1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 324 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i>The Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i> (Philadelphia, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hose and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> McDougall, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 178.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i>The Ainu and their Folklore</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 329⁠–⁠331.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i>Shinto (the Way of the Gods)</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 331 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i>The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Leyden, 1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 920 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Le Livre des Récompenses et des Peines, traduit du Chinois</i>, par Stanislas Julien (Paris, 1835), <abbr>p.</abbr> 345.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i>The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 547.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>North Queensland Ethnography: Bulletin</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 5 (Brisbane, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 31.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baldwin Spencer and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Gillen, <i>The Native Tribes of Central Australia</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 549 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. J. F. S.</abbr> Forbes, <i>British Burma</i> (London, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 232.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Decle, <i>Three Years in Savage Africa</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 153.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 314.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Hillebrandt, <i>Vedische Opfer und Zauber</i> (Strasburg, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 177; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i> (Amsterdam, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 121, 166, 173, 184. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 508.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. W.</abbr> Magoun, “The Asuri-Kalpa; a Witchcraft Practice of the Atharva-Veda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">American Journal of Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165⁠–⁠197.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Asiatick Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Fourth Edition, London, 1807) <abbr>p.</abbr> 389.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Dubois, <i>Mœurs, institutions, et cérémonies des peuples de l’Inde</i> (Paris, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 63.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Fawcett, in <i>Madras Government Museum, Bulletin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 1 (Madras, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 85.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 278 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <i>The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i> (Calcutta, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 137.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. A.</abbr> Perera, “Glimpses of Singhalese Social Life,” <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 57. For more evidence of such practices in India, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 328 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 489 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 124; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Natives of Northern India</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i> (Algiers, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 299.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i>Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique: les origines</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 213 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Chabas, <i>Le Papyrus magique Harris</i> (Chalon-sur-Saône, 1860), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 169 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. A.</abbr> Wallis Budge, in <i>Archaeologia</i>, Second Series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 428 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Egyptian Magic</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> The case happened in the reign of Rameses <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>., about 1200 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 475. As to Egyptian magic in general see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i>Die ägyptische Religion</i> (Berlin, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 148 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jastrow, <i>The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</i> (Boston, U.S.A., 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 268, 286, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270, 272, 276, 278; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Harper, <i>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</i> (New York, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 375, 376, 377 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Fossey, <i>La Magie assyrienne</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77⁠–⁠81.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jastrow, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 286 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Fossey, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 78.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. A.</abbr> Wallis Budge, “On the Hieratic Papyrus of Nesi-Amsu, a scribe in the temple of Amen-Rā at Thebes, about <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> 305,” <i>Archaeologia</i>, Second Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 393⁠–⁠601; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Egyptian Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>The Gods of the Egyptians</i> (London, 1904), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 270⁠–⁠272.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See an article by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. M. O. K.</abbr> entitled “A Horrible Rite in the Highlands,” in the <i>Weekly Scotsman</i>, Saturday, August 24, 1889; Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 385; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Maclagan, “Notes on Folklore Objects collected in Argyleshire,” <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 144⁠–⁠148; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i>Religion and Myth</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i>Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46⁠–⁠48. Many older examples of the practice of this form of enchantment in Scotland are collected by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell in his <i>Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i> (Edinburgh, 1834), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 328 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 47, 48.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bryan <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Jones, in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 302. For evidence of the custom in the Isle of Man see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Train, <i>Historical and Statistical Account of the Isle of Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 168; in England, see Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 10 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; in Germany, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 913 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 272 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to the custom in general, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i>Researches into the Early History of Mankind</i>,³ <abbr>pp.</abbr> 106 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, “Sympathie-Zauber,” <i>Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, Neue Folge, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Rogers, <i>Social Life in Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 220.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i>Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 435.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 4 (April 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 314.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Swanton, “Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida” (Leyden and New York, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 47 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i>Tribes of California</i> (Washington, 1877), <abbr>p.</abbr> 318.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, “Symbolism of the Huichol Indians,” <i>Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (May 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 52.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Delegorgue, <i>Voyage dans l’Afrique Australe</i> (Paris, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 325 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <i>The Basutos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 251.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Binger, <i>Du Niger au Golfe de Guinée</i> (Paris, 1892), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 230.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i>Shinto</i> (<i>the Way of the Gods</i>) (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 331.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>² (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 213.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Neumann, “Het Pane- en Bila-Stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, deel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1886) Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3, <abbr>p.</abbr> 515.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i>De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i> (The Hague, 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 343.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> MacFarlane, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 389 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Poensen, “Iets over de kleeding der Javanen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1876) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 274 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Plechtigheden en gebruiken uit den cyclus van het familienleven der volken van den Indischen Archipel,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 578. A slightly different account of the ceremony is given by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kreemer (“Hoe de Javaan zijne zieken verzorgt,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 116).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. A.</abbr> Buddingh, “Gebruiken bij Javaansche Grooten,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1840, deel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239⁠–⁠243.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Knebel, “Varia Javanica,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 34⁠–⁠37.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. W.</abbr> Leggat, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i> (London, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 98 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 39.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Stanislaus Ciszewski, <i>Künstliche Verwandtschaft bei den Südslaven</i> (Leipzig, 1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 103 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> In the Middle Ages a similar form of adoption appears to have prevailed, with the curious variation that the adopting parent who simulated the act of birth was the father, not the mother. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 160, 464 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J.</abbr> Bachofen, <i>Das Mutterrecht</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 254 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Liebrecht, however, quotes a medieval case in which the ceremony was performed by the adopting mother (<i>Zur Volkskunde</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 432).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this information I have to thank <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hose, formerly Resident Magistrate of the Baram district, Sarawak.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “The Bahima,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 104.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 5; Hesychius, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> Δευτερόποτμος.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Die altindischen Todten- und Bestattungsgebräuche</i> (Amsterdam, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 89. Among the Hindus of Kumaon the same custom is reported to be still observed. See Major Reade in <i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 74, § 452.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. S.</abbr> Routledge and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Routledge, <i>With a Prehistoric People, the Akikuyu of British East Africa</i> (London, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 151 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The ceremony was briefly described by me on <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Crawford’s authority in <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 228.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to these rites among the Akikuyu see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. S.</abbr> Routledge and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Routledge, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 422 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 44, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 463 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 485, 487 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 489 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 505, 532, 542, 545, 546, 549.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i> (Amsterdam, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 119; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i> (Oxford, 1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 358 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Keating, <i>Narrative of an Expedition to the Source of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s River</i> (London, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 159.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theocritus, <abbr>Id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 28 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Virgil, <i>Eclogae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 81 sq. In neither of these passages is the wax said to have been fashioned in the likeness of the beloved one, but it may have been so.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the waxen models of the human body, or parts of it, which are still dedicated to the Virgin Mary at Kevelaer, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i>Votive und Weihegaben des Katholischen Volks in Süddeutschland</i> (Brunswick, 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; and as to votive images of hearts in general, see <abbr>id.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 127 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 41; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mœurs et Superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>De sera numinis vindicta</i>, 14.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Shaw, “The Inhabitants of the Hills near Rajamahall,” <i>Asiatic Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 69 (8vo edition, London, 1807).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i> (Oxford, 1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 7 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 263 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i> (Amsterdam, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones convivales</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 7. 2, 8 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Aelian, <i>Natura animalium</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> 13.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholia on Aristophanes, <i>Birds</i>, 266; Scholia on Plato, <i>Gorgias</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 494 <b>B</b>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alfred Newton, <i>Dictionary of Birds</i> (London, 1893⁠–⁠1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 129.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span> 94. The Greek name for jaundice, and for this singular bird, was <i>ikteros</i>. The Romans called jaundice “the king’s malady” (<i>morbus regius</i>). See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p371" title="to page 371">371</a>, note⁴.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> 170.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This precious remedy was communicated to me by my colleague and friend Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Bosanquet of Liverpool. The popular Greek name for jaundice is χρυσῆ.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> von Schulenburg, <i>Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche</i> (Leipzig, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 223.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 981; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Lammert, <i>Volksmedizin und medizinischer Aberglaube in Bayern</i> (Würzburg, 1869), <abbr>p.</abbr> 248.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Weissenberg, “Krankheit und Tod bei den südrussischen Juden,” <i>Globus</i>, xci. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 358.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Freiherr von Leoprechting, <i>Aus dem Lechrain</i> (Munich, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 92; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 302, § 477.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alfred Newton, <i>Dictionary of Birds</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Gengler, “Der Kreuzschnabel als Hausarzt,” <i>Globus</i>, xci. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 117, § 164; Alois John, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube im deutschen Westböhmen</i> (Prague, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 218; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Drechsler, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Leipzig, 1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 231.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 302, § 477.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gilbert White, <i>The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> letter 28.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31, 536 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 103. In ancient Indian magic it is often prescribed that charms to heal sickness should be performed at the hour when the stars are vanishing in the sky. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85, 86, 88, 96. Was this in order that the ailment might vanish with the stars?<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 352; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 251.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Chapiseau, <i>Le Folk-lore de la Beuce et du Perche</i> (Paris, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 172 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Perham, “Manangism in Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 19 (1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 100; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 280.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marcellus, <i>De medicamentis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 82.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marcellus, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span> 100.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 176.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 179 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 184 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 199 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 206 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In the south of France and in the Pyrenees a number of caves have been found adorned with paintings or carvings of animals which have long been extinct in that region, such as the mammoth, the reindeer, and the bison. All the beasts thus represented appear to be edible, and none of them to be fierce carnivorous creatures. Hence it has been ingeniously suggested by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. S.</abbr> Reinach that the intention of these works of art may have been to multiply by magic the animals so represented, just as the Central Australians seek to increase kangaroos and emus in the manner described above. He infers that the comparatively high development of prehistoric art in Europe among men of the reindeer age may have been due in large measure to the practice of sympathetic magic. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Reinach, “L’Art et la magie,” <i>L’Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257⁠–⁠266; id., <i>Cultes, Myths et Religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125⁠–⁠136. Paintings and carvings executed in caves and on rocks by the aborigines have been described in various parts of Australia. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Grey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of two Expeditions of Discovery</i> (London, 1841), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 201⁠–⁠206; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i>The Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 289⁠–⁠294, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 309; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i>The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 476; Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 614⁠–⁠618; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Mann, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Geographical Society of Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, with illustrations; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>Ethnological Studies among the North-west-central Queensland Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 116. We may conjecture that the Hebrew prohibition to make “the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the heaven, the likeness of anything that creepeth on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under the earth” (Deuteronomy <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 17 <abbr>sq.</abbr>), was primarily directed rather against magic than idolatry in the strict sense. Ezekiel speaks (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 10⁠–⁠12) of the elders of Israel offering incense to “every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts,” portrayed on the walls of their chambers. If hieroglyphs originated, as seems possible, in representations of edible animals and plants which had long been in use for the purpose of magically multiplying the species, we could readily understand why, for example, dangerous beasts of prey should be conspicuously absent from the so-called Hittite system of hieroglyphs, without being forced to have recourse to the rationalistic explanation of their absence which has been adopted by Professors <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Hirschfeld and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. M.</abbr> Ramsay. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. M.</abbr> Ramsay, <i>The Cities and Bishoprics of Phrygia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. On the relations of art and magic, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Y.</abbr> Hirn, <i>Origins of Art</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278⁠–⁠297.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 291⁠–⁠294.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p162" title="to page 162">162</a>⁠–⁠164.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 798.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 287 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With what follows compare my article “The Origin of Circumcision,” <i>The Independent Review</i>, November 1904, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 181⁠–⁠184.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Bonney, “On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River Darling, New South Wales,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 134 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Fraser, “The Aborigines of New South Wales,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1882) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229, 231; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 451, 465.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 507, 509 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bussel in Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Grey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West and Western Australia</i> (London, 1841), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 330.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 382, 461; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 598.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 464; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 599 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>Ethnological Studies</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162, § 283. In Northwestern Queensland the blood may be drawn for this purpose from any healthy man, not necessarily from a kinsman.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 380.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 461 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 560, 562, 598.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 251, 463; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 352, 355.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>Ethnological Studies</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 174, § 305.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 250 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Among the northern Arunta the foreskin is buried, along with the blood, in a hole (<abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 268).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 667.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Clement, “Ethnographical Notes on the Western Australian Aborigines,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 11. Among the western coastal tribes of the Northern Territory of South Australia the foreskin is held against the bellies of those who have been present at the operation, then it is placed in a bag which the operator wears round his neck till the wound has healed, when he throws it into the fire. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Basedow, <i>Anthropological Notes on the Western Coastal Tribes of the Northern Territory of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 12 (printed by Hussey and Gillingham, Adelaide).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. H.</abbr> Purcell, “Rites and Customs of the Australian Aborigines,” <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> (287) (<i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span> 1893). Cloniny is perhaps a misprint for Cloncurry.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 360 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 599. Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 256 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 391.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-Colonel <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <i>Account of the English Colony in New South Wales</i>, Second Edition (London, 1804), <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 363.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94; compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. T.</abbr> Pritchard, “Notes on certain Anthropological Matters respecting the South Sea Islanders (the Samoans),” <i>Memoirs of the Anthropological Society of London</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1863⁠–⁠4), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 324⁠–⁠326.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 367, 368, 599.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9, 368, 552, 553, 554 <abbr>sq.</abbr> See further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Palmer, “On Plants used by the Natives of North Queensland,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales for 1883</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> 101. The seeds of the splendid pink water-lily (the sacred lotus) are also eaten by the natives of North Queensland. The plant grows in lagoons on the coast. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Palmer, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 372.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 353 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Some of the dwarf tribes of the Gaboon, who practise circumcision, place the severed foreskins in the trunks of a species of nut-tree (<i>Kula edulis</i>), which seems to be their totem; for the tree is said to have a certain sanctity for them, and some groups take their name from it, being called <i>A-Kula</i>, “the people of the nut-tree.” They eat the nuts, and have a special ceremony at the gathering of the first nuts of the season. See Mgr. Le Roy, “Les Pygmées,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 222 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 237.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 341.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p075" title="to page 75">75</a>⁠–⁠77.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 538 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 563, 564, 565, 566, 569, 571, 576, 586 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 588, 589, 592, 613, 616, 641, 655 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 675 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 213 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 450 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18, 329, 588 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p176" title="to page 176">176</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Blandowski, “Personal Observations made in an Excursion towards the Central Parts of Victoria,” <i>Transactions of the Philosophical Society of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Melbourne, 1855) <abbr>p.</abbr> 72. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i>Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 61; Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 453 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 452 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 594, 596.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 451.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 592⁠–⁠594.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i>Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 193; <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 193, 221.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 5 (Brisbane, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18, 23, §§ 68, 83. We are reminded of the old Greek saying to be born “of an oak or a rock” (Homer, <i>Odyssey</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 163). See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, “Oak and Rock,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 322⁠–⁠326. In Samoa, a child sometimes received as his god for life the deity who chanced to be invoked at the moment of his birth, whether that was his father’s or his mother’s god. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 79.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p183" title="to page 183">183</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-Colonel <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <i>Account of the English Colony of New South Wales</i>, Second Edition (London, 1804), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 353, 372 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> The Cammeray of whom Collins speaks are no doubt the tribe now better known as the Kamilaroi. <i>Carrahdy</i>, which he gives as the native name for a high priest, is clearly the Kamilaroi <i>kuradyi</i>, “medicine-man” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridley, <i>Kamilaroi and other Australian Languages</i>, Sydney, 1875, <abbr>p.</abbr> 158).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>If the possession of the foreskin conferred on the possessor a like power over the person to whom it had belonged, we can readily understand why the Israelites coveted the foreskins of their enemies the Philistines (1 Samuel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 25⁠–⁠27, 2 Samuel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 14). Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gunkel interprets a passage of Ezekiel (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span> 18⁠–⁠32) as contrasting the happy lot of the circumcised warrior in the under world with the misery of his uncircumcised foe in the same place, and confesses himself unable to see why circumcision should be thought to benefit the dead. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Gunkel, “Über die Beschneidung im alten Testament,” <i>Archiv für Papyrusforschung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 21. (<abbr>Prof.</abbr> Gunkel’s paper was pointed out to me by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyse.) The benefit, on the theory here suggested, was very substantial, since it allowed the dead to come to life again, the grave being a bourne from which only uncircumcised travellers fail, sooner or later, to return. But I confess that <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Gunkel’s explanation of the passage seems to me rather farfetched.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Grey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 335.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p028" title="to page 28">28</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i>Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 62; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Mann, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Geographical Society of Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 48.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i> (London, 1845), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 345 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>Ethnological Studies</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mathew, <i>Eaglehawk and Crow</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122; Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 498; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 505 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 506.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 497. Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 506.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 552 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition (1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Purvis, <i>Through Uganda to Mount Elgon</i> (London, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 302 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Weeks, “Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1908) <abbr>p.</abbr> 422.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plato, <i>Phaedo</i>, 18, <abbr>p.</abbr> 72 <b>E</b> καὶ μήν, ἔφη ὁ Κέβης ὑπολαβών, καὶ κατ’ ἐκεῖνόν γε τὸν λόγον, ὦ Σώκρατες, εἰ ἀληθής ἐστιν, ὃν σὺ εἴωθας θαμὰ λέγειν, ὅτι ἡμῖν ἡ μάθησις οὐκ ἄλλο τι ἢ ἀνάμνησις τυγχάνει οὖσα, καὶ κατὰ τοῦτον ἀνάγκη που ἡμᾶς ἐν προτέρῳ τινὶ χρόνῳ μεμαθηκέναι ἂ νῦν ἀναμιμνησκόμεθα. τοῦτο δὲ ἀδύνατον, εἰ μὴ ἦν που ἡμῶν ἡ ψυχὴ πρὶν ἐν τῷδε τῷ ἀνθρωπίνῳ εἴδει γενέσθαι· ὥστε καὶ ταύτη ἀθάνατόν τι ἔοικεν ἡ ψυχὴ εἶναι. Compare Wordsworth, <i>Ode on Intimations of Immortality</i>:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting.</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Gordon, <i>Indian Folk-tales</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 49.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 398.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. V.</abbr> Russel, in <i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. <i>Central Provinces</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1636, <abbr>p.</abbr> 130 (Canadian Reprint).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Greek Law and Folklore,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 247⁠–⁠250. For the rules themselves see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Roehl, <i>Inscriptiones Graecae Antiquissimae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 395; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 877; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 398.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This has been suggested by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> King for infant burial (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 83 <abbr>sq.</abbr>); but we need not confine the suggestion to the case of infants.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 26; Hesychius, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> Γενέσια; Im. Bekker, <i>Anecdota Graeca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 86, 231; Isaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 46; <i>The Oxyrhynchus Papyri</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Grenfell and Hunt, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (London, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 203 εὐωχίαν ἣν ποιήσονται πλησίον τοῦ τάφου μου κατ’ ἔτος τῆ γενεθλίᾳ μου ἐφ’ ᾧ διέπειν ἀργυρίου δραχμὰς ἑκατόν. My attention was called to this subject by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyse, who supplied me with many of the Greek passages referred to, including the one in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Vitarum Scriptores Graeci</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Westermann, <abbr>p.</abbr> 450; Plutarch, <i>Aratus</i>, 53; Diogenes Laertius, <i>Vitae Philosophorum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 18.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 547 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 473⁠–⁠475.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 548.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 207⁠–⁠211.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 434 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 475.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 418 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“In the Alcheringa lived ancestors who, in the native mind, are so intimately associated with the animals or plants the names of which they bear that an Alcheringa man of, say, the kangaroo totem may sometimes be spoken of either as a man-kangaroo or as a kangaroo-man. The identity of the human individual is often sunk in that of the animal or plant from which he is supposed to have originated” (Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 119).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Franz Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 45 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 427; <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 333, 338.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruyt, “Het koppensnellen der Toradja’s,” <i>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der konink. Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Deel (Amsterdam, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 203 <abbr>sq.</abbr> I follow the experienced <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt (Kruyt) in calling the natives of Central Celebes by the name of Toradjas, though that name is not used by the people themselves, but is only applied to them in a derogatory sense by the Buginese. It means no more than “inlanders.” The people are divided into a number of tribes, each with its own name, who speak for the most part one language but have no common name for themselves collectively. See <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani, “Mededeelingen omtrent de Toradjas van Midden-Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 221.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Thomas, “De jacht op het eiland Nias,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span> 277.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Van Schmid, “Aanteekeningen nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken, benevens de vooroordeelen en bijgeloovigheden der bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa Laut,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 601 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. A.</abbr> Hely, “Notes on Totemism, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, among the Western Tribes,” <i>British New Guinea, Annual Report for 1894⁠–⁠95</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, “Notes sur les coutumes et croyances superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,” <i>Cochinchine française: excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 16 (Saigon, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 157.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Macdonald, <i>Religion and Myth</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 5.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice, “Notes, archaeological, industrial, and sociological, on the Western Dénés,” <i>Transactions of the Canadian Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1892⁠–⁠93) <abbr>p.</abbr> 108; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Au pays de l’Ours Noir: chez les sauvages de la Colombie Britannique</i> (Paris and Lyons, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 71.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, verhalen en overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 502. As to the district of Galela in Halmahera see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Lafond in <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1838) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (where Galeta is apparently a misprint for Galela); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S. A.</abbr> de Clercq, <i>Bijdragen tot de Kennis der Residentie Ternate</i> (Leyden, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 112 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Kükenthal, <i>Forschungsreise in den Molukken und in Borneo</i> (Frankfurt, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 300.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The theory that taboo is a negative magic was first, I believe, clearly formulated by <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Hubert and Mauss in their essay, “Esquisse d’une théorie générale de la magie,” <i>L’Année Sociologique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (Paris, 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i>Tabou et Totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> I reached the same conclusion independently and stated it in my <i>Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 52⁠–⁠54, a passage which I have substantially reproduced in the text. When I wrote it I was unaware that the view had been anticipated by my friends <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Hubert and Mauss. See my note in <i>Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1906) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The view has been criticised adversely by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. R.</abbr> Marett (<i>The Threshold of Religion</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). But the difference between us seems to be mainly one of words; for I regard the supposed mysterious force, to which he gives the Melanesian name of <i>mana</i>, as supplying, so to say, the physical basis both of magic and of taboo, while the logical basis of both is furnished by a misapplication of the laws of the association of ideas. And with this view <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marett, if I apprehend him aright, is to a certain extent in agreement (see particularly <abbr>pp.</abbr> 102 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 113 <abbr>sq.</abbr> of his essay). However, in deference to his criticisms I have here stated the theory in question less absolutely than I did in my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lectures</i>. As to the supposed mysterious force which I take to underlie magic and taboo I may refer particularly to what I have said in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 319⁠–⁠322, 343. In speaking of taboo I here refer only to those taboos which are protected by magical or religious sanctions, not to those of which the sanctions are purely civil or legal; for I take civil or legal taboos to be merely a later extension of magical or religious taboos, which form the original stock of the institution. See my article “Taboo” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopaedia Britannica</i>, Ninth Edition, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16, 17.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, in <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 507.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i>Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 161.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxvi</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 273.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 28.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Pilsudski, “Schwangerhaft, Entbindung und Fehlgeburt bei den Bewohnern der Insel Sachalin,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 763.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Gordon, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, New Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 185; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Indian Folk Tales</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Van Schmid, “Aanteekeningen nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken, benevens de vooroordeelen en bijgeloovigheden der bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa Laut,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 604.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xl. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Snouck Hurgronje, <i>De Atjèhers</i> (Batavia and Leyden, 1893⁠–⁠94), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 409; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. A.</abbr> Klerks, “Geographisch en ethnographisch opstal over de landschappen Korintje, Sĕrampas en Soengai Tĕnang,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 73; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C.</abbr> van Eerde, “Een huwelijk bij de Minangkabausche Maliers,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 490 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Joustra, “Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 406.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Lake and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. J.</abbr> Kelsall, “The Camphor-tree and Camphor Language of Johore,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 26 (January 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 40; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 213.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i>Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i> (Philadelphia, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i>Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 269.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i>Voyage dans le Laos</i> (Paris, 1895⁠–⁠97), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 322. As to lac and the mode of cultivating it, see <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 18 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The superstition is less explicitly stated in the same writer’s <i>Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 110.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Thevet, <i>Les Singularitez de la France Antarctique, autrement nommée Amérique</i> (Antwerp, 1558), <abbr>p.</abbr> 93; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Cosmographie Universelle</i> (Paris, 1575), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 970 [wrongly numbered 936] <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maximilian, Prinz zu Wied, <i>Reise in das innere Nord-America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 247.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Grinnell, <i>Blackfoot Lodge Tales</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 237, 238.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Poeppig, <i>Reise in Chile, Peru und auf dem Amazonenstrome</i> (Leipzig, 1835⁠–⁠36), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 323.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meanwhile I may refer the reader to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 353 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. F.</abbr> Standing, “Malagasy <i>fady</i>,” <i>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (reprint of the second four numbers, 1881⁠–⁠1884) (Antananarivo, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 261.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>Savage Childhood</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 48.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i>Nursery Tales, Traditions, and Histories of the Zulus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Natal and London, 1868), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 280⁠–⁠282.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p116" title="to page 116">116</a>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p117" title="to page 117">117</a>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i>Notes sur le Laos</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Voyage dans le Laos</i> (Paris, 1895⁠–⁠97), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 62, 63.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Chalmers, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 430.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, “Les Tchames et leurs religions,” <i>Revue de l’Histoire des Religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 278.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Hahn, <i>Tsuni-ǁGoam</i> (London, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 77.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i>Head-hunters</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 259.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae</i> (Copenhagen, 1767), <abbr>p.</abbr> 500.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. J.</abbr> Holmberg, “Über die Völker des russischen Amerika,” <i>Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1856) <abbr>p.</abbr> 392.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Arctic Papers for the Expedition of 1875</i> (published by the Royal Geographical Society), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 261 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Report of the International Polar Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</i> (Washington, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 39.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i>Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 149, 160.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Roland <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Dixon, “The Northern Maidu,” <i>Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (New York, 1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 193.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Labbé, <i>Un Bagne Russe, l’Île de Sakhaline</i> (Paris, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 268.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Jochelson, “Die Jukagiren im äussersten Nordosten Asiens,” <i>Jahresbericht der geograph. Gesellschaft von Bern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 14.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 460.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. I.</abbr> Bleek, <i>A Brief Account of Bushman Folklore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 19.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Reichard, <i>Deutsch-Ostafrika</i> (Leipzig, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 427.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 318 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. D’Orbigny, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 226.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Petroff, <i>Report on the Population, Industries, and Resources of Alaska</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 155.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 126 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; as to the sacred cactus, which the Indians call <i>hikuli</i>, see <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 357 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this information I am indebted to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hose, formerly Resident Magistrate of the Baram district, Sarawak.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i>Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, “Toaripi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 327.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Eenige Aanteekeningen aangaande de Bewoners der <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Westkust van Nieuw Guinea, meer bepaaldelijk den Stam der Noefoereezen,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 263; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Die Papuastämme an der Geelvinkbai,” <i>Mitteilungen der geograph. Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Rosenberg, <i>Der malayische Archipel</i> (Leipzig, 1878), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 453, 462.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 831.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Geurtjens, “Le Cérémonial des Voyages aux Îles Keij,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337, 353. The girls bear the title of <i>wat moel</i>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C. E.</abbr> Tromp, “De Rambai en Sebroeang Dajaks,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span> 118.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, “Low’s Natives of Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 524.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hewitt, “Some Sea-Dayak Tabus,” <i>Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 186 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 120.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. O.</abbr> Forbes, “On some Tribes of the Island of Timor,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 414.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruyt, “Het koppensnellan der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes, en zijne beteekenis,” <i>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der konink. Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Deel (Amsterdam, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, verhalen en overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 507.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p120" title="to page 120">120</a>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 805.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Flacourt, <i>Histoire de la Grande Isle Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1658), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <abbr>sq.</abbr> A statement of the same sort is made by the Abbé Rochon, <i>Voyage to Madagascar and the East Indies</i>, translated from the French (London, 1792), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Struys, <i>Voiages and Travels</i> (London, 1684), <abbr>p.</abbr> 22. Struys may have copied from De Flacourt.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i>De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 341; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 312, 317.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 377.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i>The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 226.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. P.</abbr> Fitzgerald Marriott, <i>The Secret Tribal Societies of West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 17 (reprinted from <i>Ars quatuor Coronatorum</i>, the transactions of a Masonic lodge of London). The lamented Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley was so kind as to lend me a copy of this work.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 4 (April 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 356.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i>Tribes of California</i> (Washington, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Swanton, “Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida” (Leyden and New York, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir George Scott Robertson, <i>The Kafirs of the Hindu Kush</i> (London, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 335, 621⁠–⁠626.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antonio Caulin, <i>Historia Coro-graphica natural y evangelica dela Nueva Andalucia de Cumana, Guayana y Vertientes del Rio Orinoco</i> (1779), <abbr>p.</abbr> 97.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Guis, “Les Canaques, ce qu’ils font, ce qu’ils disent,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 29; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i>Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i>Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Aug.</abbr> Witzschel, <i>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</i> (Vienna, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 218, § 36.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, <i>Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i> (Leyden, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 323; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 64.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Payne, <i>History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Oxford, 1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 421. Compare Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 518 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 217.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Nota betreffende de rijstcultuur in de Residentie Tapanoeli,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 529.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This I learned from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hardy in conversation. See also his letter in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 11.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 133. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i>Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 447.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxvi</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 276.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Tetzner, “Die Kuren in Ostpreussen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxv</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 148.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 207, § 362; <i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 297, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 343.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. F.</abbr> Standing, “Malagasy <i>fady</i>,” <i>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (reprint of the second four numbers, 1881⁠–⁠1884) (Antananarivo, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Beauquier, <i>Les Mois en Franche-Comté</i> (Paris, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 30.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Sauvé, <i>Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</i> (Paris, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 142.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Sauvé, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 499; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Heinrich, <i>Agrarische Sitten und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</i> (Hermannstadt, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 11.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Meyer, <i>Badisches Volksleben im neunzehnten Jahrhundert</i> (Strasburg, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 421 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn und <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 445, § 354; J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 95, § 664; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Peter, <i>Volksthümliches aus österreichisch-Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 266; Von Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 49; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Sommer, <i>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 148; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Knoop, <i>Volkssagen, Erzählungen, Aberglauben, Gebräuche und Märchen aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 176; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Witzschel, <i>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 191, § 13; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F. L.</abbr> Woeste, <i>Volksüberlieferungen in der Grafschaft Mark</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56, § 24; <i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 298, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 379, 382; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Heinrich, <i>Agrarische Sitten und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> von Schulenberg, <i>Wendische Volkssagen und Gebräuche aus dem Spreewald</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 252; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A. E.</abbr> Köhler, <i>Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 368 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</i> (Chemnitz, 1759), <abbr>p.</abbr> 103; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Toeppen, <i>Aberglauben aus Masuren</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 68; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 396, § 657; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">U.</abbr> Jahn, <i>Die deutsche Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Sächsische Volkskunde</i>² (Dresden, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 370; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Hoffmann-Krayer, “Fruchtbarkeitsriten im schweizerischen Volksbrauch,” <i>Schweizerisches Archiv für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 260. According to one account, in leaping from the table you should hold in your hand a long bag containing flax seed (Woeste, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>). The dancing or leaping is often done specially by girls or women (Kuhn und Schwartz, Grohmann, Witzschel, Heinrich, <i>ll.cc.</i>). Sometimes the women dance in the sunlight (<i>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</i>, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>); but in Voigtland the leap from the table should be made by the housewife naked and at midnight on Shrove Tuesday (Köhler, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>). On Walpurgis Night the leap is made over an alder branch stuck at the edge of the flax field (Sommer, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Lemke, <i>Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8⁠–⁠12; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Toeppen, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Hartung, “Zur Volkskunde aus Anhalt,” <i>Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 149 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Abbott, <i>Macedonian Folklore</i> (Cambridge, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 122.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 248.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 67.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>Savage Childhood</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 291.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eijūb Abēla, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss abergläubischer Gebräuche in Syrien,” <i>Zeitschrift des deutschen Palaestina-Vereins</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 112, § 202. Compare L’Abbé <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Chémali, “Naissance et premier âge au Liban,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 734, 735.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Chwolsohn, <i>Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1856), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 469.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt (<i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 419) promised in a later investigation to prove that it was an ancient custom at harvest or in spring to load or pelt trees and plants, as well as the representatives of the spirit of vegetation, with stones, in order thereby to express the weight of fruit which was expected. This promise, so far as I know, he did not live to fulfil. Compare, however, his <i>Mythologische Forschungen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 324.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The placing of the stone on the tree is described as a punishment, but this is probably a misunderstanding.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Pitrè, <i>Usi e costumi, credenze et pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Palermo, 1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 113 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 299; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Vernaleken, <i>Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 315. On the other hand, in some parts of northwest New Guinea a woman with child may not plant, or the crop would be eaten up by pigs; and she may not climb a tree in the rice-field, or the crop would fail. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Enige aanteekeningen aangaande de Bewoners der <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Westkust van Nieuw Guinea,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 264; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Die Papuastämme an der Geelvinkbai,” <i>Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 102. Similarly the Galelareese say that a pregnant woman must not sweep under a shaddock tree, or knock the fruit from the bough, else it will taste sour instead of sweet. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 457.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohman, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 143, § 1053.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Hoffmann-Krayer, “Fruchtbarkeitsriten im schweizerischen Volksbrauch,” <i>Schweizerisches Archiv für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 263.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Abbott, <i>Macedonia Folklore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 206.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 615, line 17 ὑπὲρ καρποῦ Δήμητρι ὗν ἐγκύμονα πρωτοτόκον; compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 616, line 61 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 617, line 3; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 633 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Macrobius, <i>Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 12. 20; Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 22.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Gumilla, <i>Histoire naturelle, civile et géographique de l’Orénoque</i> (Avignon, 1758), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 184.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i>History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.² (London, 1822) <abbr>p.</abbr> 253.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Blumentritt, “Sitten und Bräuche der Ilocanen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 12, <abbr>p.</abbr> 202.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 489.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 38.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Guttmann, “Trauer und Begräbnissitten der Wadschagga,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxix</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 200.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer, “On certain Burial Customs as illustrative of the Primitive Theory of the Soul,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 69 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to negative magic or taboo, see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p111" title="to page 111">111</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 488.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 496 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 299.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1834) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 181 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 183.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Modigliani, <i>Un Viaggio a Nias</i> (Milan, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 590.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Damien Grangeon, “Les Cham et leurs superstitions,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 83.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Myths of the Cherokee,” <i>Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1900), pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 425⁠–⁠427; compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i>Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 329.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Geurtjens, “Le Cérémonial des voyages aux Îles Keij,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 352.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezan,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 466, 468.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 467.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i>History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (London, 1817) <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 505; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 240; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 624 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Habbema, “Bijgeloof in de Praenger-Regentschappen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, li. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 113.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Louwerier, “Bijgeloovige gebruiken, die door de Javanen worden in acht genomen bij het bouwen hunner huizen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 380 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i>Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 389.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 552.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 550.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 462.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Knebel, “Amulettes javanaises,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, xl. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 506.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 215, <abbr>No.</abbr> 760; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 261.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>p.</abbr> 22.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Rutenen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 282.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i>Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</i> (Paris, 1880), bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> ch. 31, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 274 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Seler, <i>Altmexikanische Studien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 51 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Veröffentlichungen aus dem königlichen Museum für Völkerkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities of Great Britain</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 278 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Bohn’s <abbr>ed.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Henderson, <i>Folklore of the Northern Counties of England</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i>Niederländische Sagen</i> (Leipzig, 1843), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363⁠–⁠365.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Strackerjan, <i>Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 100 <abbr>sq.</abbr> § 141; J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 106 § 758, <abbr>p.</abbr> 205 § 1421; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>pp.</abbr> 126 <abbr>sq.</abbr> § 184; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Gittée, <i>De hand en de vingeren in het volksgeloof</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Compare Tettau und Temme, <i>Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aelian, <i>Natura Animalium</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 38.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 140. The custom of placing coins on the eyes of a corpse to prevent them from opening is not uncommon. Its observance in England is attested by the experienced <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gamp:⁠—“When Gamp was summonsed to his long home, and I see him a-lying in Guy’s Hospital with a penny piece on each eye, and his wooden leg under his left arm, I thought I should have fainted away. But I bore up” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Dickens, <i>Martin Chuzzlewit</i>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Grinnell, <i>Blackfoot Lodge Tales</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 238.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 284.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 43; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hesiod, <i>Works and Days</i>, 750 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> But the lines are not free from ambiguity. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> Paley’s note on the passage.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i> (Algiers, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 302 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Campbell, <i>Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</i> (London, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 206; Barnabas Shaw, <i>Memorials of South Africa</i> (London, 1840), <abbr>p.</abbr> 66.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <i>The Basutos</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 271 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 272.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> James Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Religions, and Superstitions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 132.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Leared, <i>Morocco and the Moors</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 272.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 27.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i>Rechtsverhältnisse und Sitten der Wadschagga</i> (Gotha, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 21 (<i>Petermanns Mitteilungen</i>, Ergänzungsheft, <abbr>No.</abbr> 138).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i>Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 160.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 505.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 484.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Geurtjens, “Le Cérémonial des voyages aux Iles Keij,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 352.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, <i>Les Ba-ronga</i> (Neuchâtel, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 472 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i> (Algiers, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 244 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of American Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 293, referring to Hesketh Pritchard, <i>Through the Heart of Patagonia</i> (London, 1902).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25 (separate reprint from <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. A.</abbr> Hely, “Notes on Totemism, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, among the Western Tribes,” <i>British New Guinea: Annual Report for 1894⁠–⁠95</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, <i>Les Ba-ronga</i> (Neuchâtel, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 472.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Jaussen, <i>Coutumes arabes au pays de Moab</i> (Paris, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 29.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Poeppig, <i>Reise in Chile, Peru und auf dem Amazonenstrome</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 323.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Thevet, <i>Cosmographie universelle</i> (Paris, 1575), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 946 (980).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Jaussen, “Coutumes arabes,” <i>Revue Biblique</i>, April 1903, <abbr>p.</abbr> 245; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Coutumes arabes au pays de Moab</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 147.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 545 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 494 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 344.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aelian, <i>Natura Animalium</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 42, 43, and 48.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 234.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 290.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Myths of the Cherokee,” <i>Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1900), part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262, 284, 285, 306, 308.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 285.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 309.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 309.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Crevaux, <i>Voyages dans l’Amérique du Sud</i> (Paris, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholiast on Plato, <i>Theaetetus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 160 <b>A</b>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 483.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 534.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Chavannes, <i>Documents sur les Tou-Kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 134.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aelian, <i>Natura animalium</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 38.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Jaussen, <i>Coutumes arabes au pays de Moab</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dos Santos, <i>Eastern Ethiopia</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> ch. 20 (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> McCall Theal, <i>Records of South-Eastern Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 224).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>One of these shells is exhibited in the Anthropological Museum at Berlin, with a label explaining its use. I do not know to what species it belongs. It appeared to me to be of a sort which may often be seen on mantelpieces in England.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 468.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The king was Iphiclus; the wise man was Melampus. See Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 9. 12; Eustathius on Homer, <i>Odyssey</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 292; Scholia on Theocritus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 43. The way in which the king’s impotence was caused by the knife is clearly indicated by the scholiast, on Theocritus: συνέβη ἐπενεγκεῖν αὐτὴν [scil. τὴν μάχαιραν] τοῖς μορίοις τοῦ παιδός. In this scholium we must correct ἐκτέμνοντι⁠ ⁠… δένδρον into ἐκτέμνοντι⁠ ⁠… ζῷα. Eustathius (<abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>) quotes the scholium in this latter form. The animals were rams, according to Apollodorus.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Het ijzer in Midden-Celebes,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 159.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i>Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Leyden, 1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 173.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>G</i>ri<i>hya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 146.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>G</i>ri<i>hya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168, 282 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 188 (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.). Compare Sonnerat, <i>Voyage aux Indes Orientales</i> (Paris, 1782), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 81; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i> (Madras, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 1. So among the Kookies of Northern Cachar in India the young couple at marriage place each a foot on a large stone in the middle of the village. See <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Stewart, “Notes on Northern Cachar,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1855) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 620 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In the old ruined church of Balquhidder in Perthshire there is an ancient gravestone on which people used to stand barefoot at marriages and baptisms. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 271.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Abinal, “Astrologie Malgache,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 482.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The First Nine Books of the Danish History of Saxo Grammaticus</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Elton (London, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 16. The original runs thus: <i>Lecturi regem veteres affixis humo saxis insistere suffragiaque promere consueverant, subjectorum lapidum firmitate facti constantiam ominaturi</i> (<i>Historia Danica</i>, <abbr>lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 22, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. E.</abbr> Müller).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristotle, <i>Constitution of Athens</i>, 7 and 55; Plutarch, <i>Solon</i>, 25; Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 86.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin, “Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 657.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 646.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 627 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Munzinger, <i>Sitten und Recht der Bogos</i> (Winterthur, 1859), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 33 <abbr>sq.</abbr> For an Indian example of swearing on a stone see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eliot, “Observations on the Inhabitants of the Garrow Hills,” <i>Asiatick Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 30 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (8vo <abbr>ed.</abbr>). On the custom see further my article, “Folk-lore in the Old Testament,” in <i>Anthropological Essays presented to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor</i> (Oxford, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 22. 1; compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 31. 4.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ptolemaeus, <i>Nova Historia</i>, in Photius, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 153, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Bekker; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i>Mythographi Graeci</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Westermann, <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 253 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 472.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15, 16, 25<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 273, 287, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 104⁠–⁠106, 116⁠–⁠118; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mœurs et Superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 217, 218, 222, 292⁠–⁠304. Compare Glaumont, “Usages, mœurs et coutumes des Néo-Calédoniens,” <i>Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 114 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (whose account of the stones is borrowed from Father Lambert).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i> (Oxford, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 181⁠–⁠185.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridgeway, <i>The Early Age of Greece</i> (Cambridge, 1901), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 330 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “The Origin of Jewellery,” <i>Report of the British Association for 1903</i> (meeting at Southport), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 815 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Orphica: Lithica</i>, 230 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Hermann. Pliny mentions (<i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> 192) a white tree-stone (“<i>dendritis alba</i>”) which, if buried under a tree that was being felled, would prevent the woodman’s axe from being blunted.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Orphica: Lithica</i>, 189 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; compare Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> 162.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridgeway, <i>The Early Age of Greece</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 330.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> von Hahn, <i>Albanesische Studien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 158.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Freiherr von Leoprechting, <i>Aus dem Lechrain</i> (Munich, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 92.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Orphica: Lithica</i>, 335 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> This was perhaps the “dragon-stone” which was supposed to confer extraordinary sharpness of vision on its owner. See Ptolemaeus Hephaestionis, <i><abbr>Nov.</abbr> Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 150, in Photius, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Bekker, <abbr>p.</abbr> 192 of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Westermann’s <i>Mythographi Graeci</i>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> 124.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Orphica: Lithica</i>, 320 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> von Hahn, <i>Albanesische Studien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 158. On the magic of precious stones see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 361 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 369 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The G</i>ri<i>hya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 43, 285 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 47 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 193 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.). In the last passage the address to the star is fuller and more explicit. A part of it runs thus:⁠—“He who knows thee (the polar star) as the firm, immovable Brahman with its children and with its grandchildren, with such a man children and grandchildren will firmly dwell, servants and pupils, garments and woollen blankets, bronze and gold, wives and kings, food, safety, long life, glory, renown, splendour, strength, holy lustre, and the enjoyment of food. May all these things firmly and immovably dwell with me!”<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <i>Légendes, croyances et superstitions de la mer</i> (Paris, 1886), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 136.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 135.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 499.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 42.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Ibid</i>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 220.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Philostratus, <i>Vita Apollonii</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 2.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <i>Légendes, croyances et superstitions de la mer</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 132.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 129⁠–⁠132; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. E.</abbr> James in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 189.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dickens, <i>David Copperfield</i>, chap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Henderson, <i>Folklore of the Northern Counties of England</i> (London, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 58.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>.</i> Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Scene 3.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Harrison, “Religion and Family among the Haidas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 sq.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Martin, “Über die Eingeborenen von Chiloe,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1877) <abbr>p.</abbr> 179.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 465.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i>The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 60⁠–⁠63. Among the hairpins provided for a woman’s burial is almost always one which is adorned with small silver figures of a stag, a tortoise, a peach, and a crane. These being emblems of longevity, it is supposed that the pin which is decorated with them will absorb some of their life-giving power and communicate it to the woman in whose hair it is ultimately to be fastened. See De Groot, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 55⁠–⁠57.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 977.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1043 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Mission Pavie, Indo-Chine, 1879⁠–⁠1895, Géographie et voyages</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35⁠–⁠37. The kind of optical illusion which this mock execution was intended to expiate is probably caused by a mist or exhalation rising from damp ground.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 524.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i>Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 352; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i>Nineteenth Annual Report, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 295.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1642, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 86 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Canadian reprint).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i>History of Madagascar</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 454 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Father Abinal, “Astrologie Malgache,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1879) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 432⁠–⁠434, 481⁠–⁠483. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Piolet, <i>Madagascar et les Hovas</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The principles of contagious magic are lucidly stated and copiously illustrated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland in the second volume of his <i>Legend of Perseus</i> (London, 1895).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meantime I may refer the reader to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 367 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i>Dreissig Jähre in der Südsee</i> (Stuttgart, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 118 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the diffusion of this custom in Australia see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p097" title="to page 97">97</a>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p097" title="to page 97">97</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Bonney, “On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River Darling, New South Wales,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 128. For the practice of some Victorian tribes see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p098" title="to page 98">98</a>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 456 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 561.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 55, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 81; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 561 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 80 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 655 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Porte, “Les Reminiscences d’un missionnaire du Basutoland,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 312.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charlotte Latham, “West Sussex Superstitions lingering in 1868,” <i>Folklore Record</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 44.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 330, § 526; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 307; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Krause, in <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 79; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Vonbun, <i>Volkssagen aus Vorarlberg</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 67; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 208, §§ 37, 39; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Lammert, <i>Volksmedizin und medizinischer Aberglaube in Bayern</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Prahn, “Glaube und Brauch in der Mark Brandenburg,” <i>Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 193; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Raff, “Aberglaube in Bayern,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 400; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</i> (Brunswick, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 213. Compare J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 169, § 1197.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 546.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Weissenberg, “Kinderfreud und -leid bei den südrussischen Juden,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 317.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyatt Gill, <i>Jottings from the Pacific</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 222 <abbr>sq.</abbr> On the use of roof-thatch in superstitious ceremonies see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82 n.² 182 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In the present case the virtue of the thatch clearly depends on its harbouring rats. Some Dravidian tribes forbid a menstruous woman to touch the house-thatch (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i>, Westminster, 1896, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 269).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i>De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 176.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 75.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 822.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Blumentritt, “Sitten und Bräuche der Ilocanen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 12, <abbr>p.</abbr> 200.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i>Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 316 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 510, § 415.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 111, § 822.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. A.</abbr> Perera, “Glimpses of Cinghalese Social Life,” <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 435.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55 at top, <abbr>p.</abbr> 111, § 825. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. P.</abbr> Goudy kindly translated the Czech words for me.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Krause, “Abergläubische Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i>Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 39.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Myths of the Cherokee,” <i>Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1900), part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Abbott, <i>Macedonian Folklore</i> (Cambridge, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 111, § 823; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 330, § 527.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 593.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rasmussen, <i>Additamenta ad historiam Arabum ante Islamismum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 64.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L’Abbé <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Chémali, “Naissance et premier âge au Liban,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 745.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i> (Leipzig, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 68.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>² (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 184.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elsdon Best, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Goldie, “Maori Medical Lore,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>George Bennett, <i>Wanderings in New South Wales, Batavia, Pedir Coast, Singapore and China</i> (London, 1834), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 128, note*. As to <i>fenua</i> or <i>whenua</i> in the sense of “placenta” and “land,” see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tregear, <i>Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary</i> (Wellington, N.Z., 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 620 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 323.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Moore, <i>Descriptive Vocabulary of the Language in Common Use amongst the Aborigines of Western Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 9 (published along with the author’s <i>Diary of Ten Years’ Eventful Life of an Early Settler in Western Australia</i>, London, 1884, but paged separately).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 467.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 607.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 608. The writers add that the child has no special connection with the tree in after years. We may suspect that such a connection did exist in former times.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>North Queensland Ethnography</i>, Bulletin <abbr>No.</abbr> 5 (Brisbane, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 18. As to the mode of determining where the soul of the child has dwelt since its last incarnation, see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p099" title="to page 99">99</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, in <i>Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i>Neu-Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to me dated May 29, 1901.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hahl, “Mittheilungen über Sitten und rechtliche Verhältnisse auf Ponape,” <i>Ethnologisches Notizblatt</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 10.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, “Beiträge zur Ethnologie der Gilbertinsulaner,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 35. In these islands the children of well-to-do parents are always adopted by other people as soon as they are weaned. See <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 33.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 461.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei-Eilanden,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 816 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i>De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 236.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 354.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 303.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 208.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23, 135, 236, 328, 391, 417, 449, 468.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 135.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 391.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Van Schmidt, “Aanteekeningen nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, der bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa Laut,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, Batavia, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 523⁠–⁠526. The customs and beliefs on this subject in the adjoining island of Amboyna seem to be identical. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73 <abbr>sq.</abbr> According to Riedel, if the pot with the afterbirth does not sink in the water, it is a sign that the wife has been unfaithful.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 326.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 434 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In Parigi after a birth the <i>kindspek</i> (?) is wrapt in a leaf and hung in a tree at some distance from the house. For the people think that if it were burned, the child would die (<abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 434).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Mori,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederl. Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 218.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 236.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i>Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i> (The Hague, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 57⁠–⁠60.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Heijmering, “Zeden en gewoonten op het eiland Timor,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrland’s Indië</i>, 1845, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 279 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Letteboer, “Eenige aanteekeningen omtrent de gebruiken bij zwangerschap en geboorte onder de Savuneezen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 47.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Heijmering, “Zeden en gewoonten op het eiland Rottie,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 637 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i>The Island of Flores</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 7 (reprinted from the <i>Revue Coloniale Internationale</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Julius Jacobs, <i>Eenigen tijd onder de Baliërs</i> (Batavia, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 9.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Winter, “Instellingen, gewoonten en gebruiken der Javanen te Soerakarta,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 695 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Veth, <i>Java</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Haarlem, 1875) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 639 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Poensen, “Iets over de kleeding der Javanen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1876) <abbr>p.</abbr> 281.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Louwerier, “Bijgeloovige gebruiken, die door de Javanen worden in acht genomen bij de verzorging en opvoeding bunner kinderen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 254 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Veth, <i>Java</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 231.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ris, “De onderafdeeling klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan en hare Bevolking met uitzondering van de Oeloes,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 504.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> Heyting, “Beschrijving der onderafdeeling Groot Mandeling en Batang-Natal,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 292.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C.</abbr> van Eerde, “Een huwelijk bij de Minangkabausche Maliers,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 493.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, <i>Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i> (Leyden, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 267.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-703" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Joustra, “Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 407 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The transferable soul is in Batta <i>tendi</i>, in Malay <i>sumangat</i>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Joustra thinks that the placenta is, in the opinion of the Battas, the original seat of this soul.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-704" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Neumann, “De <i>tĕndi</i> in verband met Si Dajang,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 102.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-705" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. H. F. J.</abbr> Nusselein, “Beschrijving van het landschap Pasir,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lviii</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 537 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-706" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 370.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-707" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. R. T.</abbr> Gurdon, <i>The Khasis</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 124 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-708" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Annandale, “Customs of the Malayo-Siamese,” <i>Fasciculi Malayenses</i>, Anthropology, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (a) (May 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 5.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-709" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i>The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (Leyden, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 396 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-710" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Siebold, <i>Ethnologische Studien über die Aino</i> (Berlin, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 32.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-711" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nordost Afrikas: die materielle Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 192.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-712" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 33, 45, 46, 63, 76; <abbr>id.</abbr> “Kibuka, the War God of the Baganda,” <i>Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 164 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In the former of these two accounts <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Roscoe speaks of the placenta, not the navel-string, as the “twin” (<i>mulongo</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-713" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Garcilasso de la Vega, <i>Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> ch. 24, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 186, Markham’s translation.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-714" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i>Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 310; compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 240, 439, 440 (Jourdanet and Simeon’s translation).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-715" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1639, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44 (Canadian reprint).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-716" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 304 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-717" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas in <i>Eleventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1896</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-718" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “The Indian Navel Cord,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of American Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 197.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-719" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 346.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-720" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Krause, “Abergläubische Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin und nächster Umgebung,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-721" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Chapiseau, <i>Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</i> (Paris, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 16.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-722" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Rutenen in der Bukowina und Galizien,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 282.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-723" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn, <i>Märkische Sagen und Märchen</i> (Berlin, 1843), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 379 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-724" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C.</abbr> Atkinson, in <i>County Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (London, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 68.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-725" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. <i>Wuttke, Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² § 305, <abbr>p.</abbr> 203; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ploss, <i>Das Kind</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 12 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-726" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 728, note 1. As to the East Indian belief see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p187" title="to page 187">187</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-727" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bartels, “Islandischer Brauch und Volksglaube in Bezug auf die Nachkommenschaft,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 70 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-728" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aelius Lampridius, <i>Antoninus Diadumenus</i>, 4; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ploss, <i>Das Kind</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13, 14.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-729" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 135.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-730" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 728 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 266 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bartels, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 70. Grimm speaks as if it were only the caul which became a <i>fylgia</i>. I follow <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Bartels.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-731" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meantime I may refer to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 350 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> For other superstitions concerning the afterbirth and navel-string see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ploss, <i>Das Kind</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 15 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 198 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The connection of these parts of the body with the idea of the external soul has already been indicated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Crawley (<i>The Mystic Rose</i>, London, 1902, <abbr>p.</abbr> 119).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-732" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 36.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-733" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i> (Oxford, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-734" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” <i>Report of the U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> National Museum for 1895</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 440.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-735" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-736" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 667.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-737" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Francis Bacon, <i>Natural History</i>, cent. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. § 998. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Brand <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 305, quoting Werenfels. In Dryden’s play <i>The Tempest</i> (Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Scene 1) Ariel directs Prospero to anoint the sword which wounded Hippolito and to wrap it up close from the air. See Dryden’s <i>Works</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Scott, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 191 (first edition).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-738" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Groome, “Suffolk Leechcraft,” <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 126. Compare <i>County Folklore: Suffolk</i>, edited by Lady <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. C.</abbr> Gurdon, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25 <abbr>sq.</abbr> A like belief and practice occur in Sussex (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Latham, “West Sussex Superstitions,” <i>Folklore Record</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 43 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). See further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland, <i>The Legend of Perseus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 169⁠–⁠172.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-739" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Death from Lockjaw at Norwich,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Peoples Weekly Journal for Norfolk</i>, July 19, 1902, <abbr>p.</abbr> 8.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-740" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. N.</abbr> Webb, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 337.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-741" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Partridge, <i>Cross River Natives</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 295.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-742" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 305, compare 277.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-743" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Pröhle, <i>Harzbilder</i> (Leipzig, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 82.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-744" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 225, § 282.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-745" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bavaria, <i>Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 223. A further recommendation is to stroke the wound or the instrument with a twig of an ash-tree and then keep the twig in a dark place.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-746" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-747" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 302; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Kolbe, <i>Hessische Volks- Sitten und Gebräuche im Lichte der heidnischen Vorzeit</i> (Marburg, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 87.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-748" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Erdweg, “Die Bewohner der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,” <i>Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-749" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Erdweg, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-750" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Hagen, <i>Unter den Papua’s</i> (Wiesbaden, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 269.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-751" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On Australian Medicine Men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363⁠–⁠365.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-752" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. T.</abbr> Somerville, “Notes on some Islands of the New Hebrides,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1894) <abbr>p.</abbr> 19.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-753" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theocritus, <abbr>Id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 53 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Similarly the witch in Virgil (<i>Eclog.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 92 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>) buries under her threshold certain personal relics (<i>exuviae</i>) which her lover had left behind.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-754" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tettau und Temme, <i>Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i> (Berlin, 1837), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 283 <abbr>sq.</abbr> For more evidence of the same sort see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland, <i>Legend of Perseus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 86 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-755" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 245 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn, <i>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 192; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Die Herabkunft des Feuers</i>,² <abbr>pp.</abbr> 200 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Die Götterwelt der deutschen und nordischen Völker</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 203 note. Compare Montanus, <i>Die deutsche Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 117.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-756" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fison and Howitt, <i>Kamilaroi and Kurnai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 250; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On Australian Medicine Men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 366 <abbr>sq.</abbr> According to one account a cross should be made in the footprint with a piece of quartz, and round the footprint thus marked the bones of kangaroos should be stuck in the ground. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i>Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 476 <abbr>sq.</abbr> These and many of the following examples were cited by me in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> For more instances of the same sort see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland, <i>The Legend of Perseus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (London, 1895) 78⁠–⁠83.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-757" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 541.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-758" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 340 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-759" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i> (Stuttgart, 1907), <abbr>p.</abbr> 605.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-760" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elsdon Best, “Spiritual Concepts of the Maori,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 196.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-761" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Basil <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Thomson, <i>Savage Island</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 97.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-762" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 512.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-763" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Hearn, <i>Glimpses of unfamiliar Japan</i> (London, 1894), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 604.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-764" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Mason, “On Dwellings, Works of Art, Laws, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, of the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1868) part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 149.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-765" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 280.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-766" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <i>Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 221.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-767" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 295; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-768" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Hillebrandt, <i>Vedische Opfer und Zauber</i> (Strasburg, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 173.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-769" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Josaphat Hahn, “Die Ovaherero,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 503.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-770" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 313 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-771" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i>The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-772" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Shuswap” (Leyden and New York, 1909) <abbr>p.</abbr> 613 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-773" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 59.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-774" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bartsch, <i>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 329 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, §§ 1597, 1598, 1601<sup>a</sup>.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-775" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L. M.</abbr> Noguès, <i>Les Mœurs d’autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</i> (Saintes, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 169 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> de Mensignac, <i>Recherches ethnographiques sur la salive et le crachat</i> (Bordeaux, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 45 note.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-776" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>County Folklore: Suffolk</i>, edited by Lady <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. C.</abbr> Gurdon, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-777" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Josaphat Hahn, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bartsch, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 330, 334, §§ 1599, 1611<sup>abc</sup>, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 332, § 1607; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i>Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, Neue Folge (Leipzig, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8, 11.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-778" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> von den Steinen, <i>Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 558.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-779" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 200, § 1402.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-780" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tettau and Temme, <i>Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 267; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bezzenberger, <i>Litauische Forschungen</i> (Göttingen, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 69.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-781" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bartsch, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 330, § 1599.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-782" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Holzmayer, “Osiliana,” <i>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1872) <abbr>p.</abbr> 79.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-783" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-784" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Saxo Grammaticus, <i>Historia Danica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 40, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. E.</abbr> Müller (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 28 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Elton’s English translation).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-785" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aelian, <i>De natura animalium</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 36.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-786" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Fragmenta Philosophorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. G. A.</abbr> Mullach, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 510.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-787" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 127, § 186.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-788" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i>Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 54.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-789" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophilus Hahn, <i>Tsuni-Goam</i> (London, 1881), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 84 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-790" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 371 (<i>The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-791" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Jones, <i>History of the Ojebway Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 154.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-792" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i>Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 389.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-793" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 121 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-794" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i>The Ainu and their Folklore</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 516.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-795" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i>The Religious System of the Amazulu</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 345 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-796" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On Australian Medicine Men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-797" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i>Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 475.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-798" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i>Head-hunters</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 202.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-799" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-800" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Erdweg, “Die Bewohner der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,” <i>Mitteilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-800" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-801" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, <i>Komm herüber und hilf uns! oder die Arbeit der Neuen Dettelsauer Mission</i>, Heft <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Barmen, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 10.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-801" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-802" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jamblichus, <i>Adhortatio ad philosophiam</i>, 21; Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones convivales</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 7; Clement of Alexandria, <i>Stromateis</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 5, <abbr>p.</abbr> 661, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Potter. Compare Diogenes Laertius, <i>Vitae philosophorum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 1. 17; Suidas, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Pythagoras.”<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-802" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-803" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For detailed proof of this I may refer to my article, “Some popular Superstitions of the Ancients,” <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-803" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-804" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <i>The Basutos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 273.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-804" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-805" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Richardson, <i>Travels in the Great Desert of Sahara</i> (London, 1848), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 65.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-805" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-806" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jamblichus, Plutarch, Clement of Alexandria, Diogenes Laertius, Suidas, <i>ll.cc.</i><a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-806" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-807" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>É. Aymonier, “Notes sur les coutumes et croyances superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,” <i>Cochinchine Française: excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 16 (Saigon, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 163.<a href="chapter-1-3.xhtml#noteref-1-1-807" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-808" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Malay magic in particular is deeply tinctured with a belief in spirits, to whom the magician appeals by kindly words and small gifts of food, drink, and even money. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. J.</abbr> Wilkinson, <i>Malay Beliefs</i> (London and Leyden, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Here, therefore, religion is encroaching on magic, as it might naturally be expected to do in a race so comparatively advanced as the Malays.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-808" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-809" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i>Religio est, quae superioris cujusdam naturae, quam divinam vocant, curam caerimoniamque adfert</i>,” Cicero, <i>De inventione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 161.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-809" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-810" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 17.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-810" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-811" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Piety is not a religion, though it is the soul of all religions. A man has not a religion simply by having pious inclinations, any more than he has a country simply by having philanthropy. A man has not a country until he is a citizen in a state, until he undertakes to follow and uphold certain laws, to obey certain magistrates, and to adopt certain ways of living and acting. Religion is neither a theology nor a theosophy; it is more than all this; it is a discipline, a law, a yoke, an indissoluble engagement” (Joubert, quoted by Matthew Arnold, <i>Essays in Criticism</i>, First Series, London, 1898, <abbr>p.</abbr> 288).<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-811" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-812" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Micah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 8.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-812" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-813" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 27.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-813" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-814" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The opposition of principle between magic and religion is well brought out by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Lyall in his <i>Asiatic Studies</i>, First Series (London, 1899), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 99 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> It is also insisted on by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. B.</abbr> Jevons in his <i>Introduction to the History of Religion</i> (London, 1896). The distinction is clearly apprehended and sharply maintained by Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg in his notable book <i>Die Religion des Veda</i> (Berlin, 1894); see especially <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 311 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 476 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Lord Avebury has courteously pointed out to me that the fundamental difference between magic and religion was dwelt on by him many years ago. See his <i>Origin of Civilisation</i> (London, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 116, 164 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, and the Preface to the sixth edition of that work (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. I am glad to find myself in agreement with Lord Avebury on this subject, and only regret that in preparing my second edition I was unaware that the view here taken has the support of his high authority. When I wrote this book originally I failed to realise the extent of the opposition between magic and religion, because I had not formed a clear general conception of the nature of religion, and was disposed to class magic loosely under it.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-814" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-815" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i>Die Religion der alten Ägypter</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142⁠–⁠145, 148; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i>Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique: les origines</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-815" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-816" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 11, quoting Porphyry.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-816" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-817" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Dubois, <i>Mœurs, institutions et cérémonies des peuples de l’Inde</i> (Paris, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 60 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-817" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-818" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <i>Religious Thought and Life in India</i> (London, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-818" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-819" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To prevent misconception I would ask the reader to observe that the earlier stage here spoken of, in which magic is confused with religion, is not, in my opinion, the earliest of all, having been preceded by a still earlier stage in which magic existed alone. See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p233" title="to page 233">233</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr> On my view, the evolution of thought on this subject has passed through three stages: first, a stage in which magic existed without religion; second, a stage in which religion, having arisen, cooperated, and was to some extent confused, with magic; and third, a stage in which, the radical difference of principle between the two having been recognised, their relation was that of open hostility.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-819" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-820" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p072" title="to page 72">72</a>, <a href="#p077" title="to page 77">77</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <a href="#p130" title="to page 130">130</a>, <a href="#p163" title="to page 163">163</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-820" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-821" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 191 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The word <i>mana</i> is Polynesian as well as Melanesian. In the Maori language it means “authority,” especially “supernatural power,” “divine authority,” “having qualities which ordinary persons or things do not possess.” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tregear, <i>Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary</i> (Wellington, N.Z., 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 203. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 184, “the <i>mana</i>, virtue of the god.”<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-821" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-822" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 59.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-822" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-823" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 477. For particular examples of the blending of magical with religious ritual in ancient India see <abbr>pp.</abbr> 311 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 369 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 476 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 522 <abbr>sq.</abbr> of the same work.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-823" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-824" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Lévi, <i>La Doctrine du sacrifice dans les Brâhmanas</i> (Paris, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 129.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-824" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-825" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-825" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-826" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-826" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-827" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i> (Strasburg, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 637 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In ancient Arabia the <i>kâhin</i> (etymologically equivalent to the Hebrew <i>kôhen</i>, “priest”) seems to have been rather a soothsayer than a priest. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Wellhausen, <i>Reste arabischen Heidentums</i>² (Berlin, 1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 134, 143. The confusion of magic with religion, of spell with prayer, may also be detected in the incantations employed by Toda sorcerers at the present day. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i>The Todas</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 272 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: “The formulae of magic and of the dairy ritual are of the same nature, though the differentiation between the sorcerer and the priest who use them is even clearer than that between the sorcerer and the medicine-man. It is probable that the names of the gods with the characteristic formulae of the prayer are later additions to the magical incantation; that at some time the sorcerer has added the names of the most important of his deities to the spells and charms which at one time were thought to be sufficient for his purpose.”<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-827" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-828" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i>Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptienne</i> (Paris, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 106.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-828" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-829" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i>Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 471.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-829" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-830" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i>Die Religion der alten Ägypter</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 154.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-830" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-831" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, “Ein altägyptischer Weltschöpfungsmythus,” <i>Am Urquell</i>, N.F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 95 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-831" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-832" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Lecœur, <i>Esquisses du Bocage Normand</i> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883⁠–⁠1887), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 78. In Beauce and Perche it was especially conflagrations caused by lightning which the priest was supposed to extinguish by the recitation of certain secret formulas. There was a regular expression for this procedure, namely, “barring the fire.” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Chapiseau, <i>Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 216.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-832" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-833" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Amélie Bosquet, <i>La Normandie romanesque et merveilleuse</i> (Paris and Rouen, 1845), <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-833" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-834" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p225" title="to page 225">225</a>.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-834" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-835" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i> (Paris, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 455 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 217 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 222 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Reminiscences populaires de la Provence</i> (Paris, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 288 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Monnier, <i>Traditions populaires comparées</i> (Paris, 1854), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-835" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-836" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Bladé, <i>Quatorze superstitions populaires de la Gascogne</i> (Agen, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-836" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-837" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the evidence see my <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-837" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-838" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The suggestion has been made by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg (<i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 59), who seems, however, to regard a belief in spirits as part of the raw material of magic. If the view which I have put forward tentatively is correct, faith in magic is probably older than a belief in spirits. The same view as to the priority of magic to religion, and apparently also as to the absence of spirits from primitive magic, was held by Hegel. It was not until long after the discussion in the text had been written that I became aware that my conclusions had been to a large extent anticipated by the German philosopher. See Appendix at the end of this volume.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-838" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-839" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>After a visit to the ruined Greek temples of Paestum, whose beauty and splendour impressed him all the more by contrast with the savagery of the surrounding peasantry, Renan wrote: “<i>J’ai tremblé pour la civilisation, en la voyant si limitée, assise sur une faible assiette, reposant sur si peu d’individus dans le pays même où elle est regnante.</i>” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Renan et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Berthelot, <i>Correspondance</i> (Paris, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-839" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-840" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p068" title="to page 68">68</a> sq.; “The Witch-burning at Clonmel,” <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 373⁠–⁠384; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 144 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-840" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-841" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i>Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 471.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-841" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-842" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Fossey, <i>La Magie Assyrienne</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123, 125.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-842" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-843" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Fossey, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 137⁠–⁠139. For the incident of the magical disappearance and reappearance of the garment, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Jensen, <i>Assyrisch-Babylonische Mythen und Epen</i> (Berlin, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Harper, <i>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</i> (New York, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 291.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-843" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-844" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 66⁠–⁠68, 514⁠–⁠517.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-844" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-845" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kauffmann, <i>Balder, Mythus und Sage</i> (Strasburg, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 177⁠–⁠203. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1024⁠–⁠1026.<a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-845" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-846" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Vigfusson and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> York Powell, <i>Corpus Poeticum Boreale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 24 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-4.xhtml#noteref-1-1-846" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-847" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p214" title="to page 214">214</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-847" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-848" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 342, note. The heathen Swedes appear to have mimicked thunder, perhaps as a rain-charm, by means of large bronze hammers, which they called Thor’s hammers. See Saxo Grammaticus, <i>Historia Danica</i>, <abbr>lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 630, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. E.</abbr> Müller; Olaus Magnus, <i>Historia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 8.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-848" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-849" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Bruchhausen, in <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxvi</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 253. There seem to be two villages in Wallachia that bear the name of Ploska. The reference may be to one of them.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-849" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-850" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F. H.</abbr> Campen, “De Godsdienstbegrippen der Halmaherasche Alfoeren,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 447.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-850" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-851" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i>De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 114.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-851" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-852" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A. J.</abbr> Hazen, “Kleine bijdragen tot de ethnografie en folklore van Java,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-852" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-853" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i>Im Bismarck Archipel</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 143. Compare Joachim Graf Pfeil, <i>Studien und Beobachtungen aus der Südsee</i> (Brunswick, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 139 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-853" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-854" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Owen Dorsey, “Omaha Sociology,” <i>Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 347. Compare Charlevoix, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique septentrionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 187.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-854" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-855" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, Nouvelle Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 29 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-855" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-856" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 180, 330.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-856" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-857" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i>Religion and Myth</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 10.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-857" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-858" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Labat, <i>Relation historique de l’Éthiopie occidentale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 180.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-858" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-859" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i>Rechtsverhältnisse und Sitten der Wadschagga</i> (Gotha, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 34 (<i>Petermanns Mitteilungen</i>, Ergänzungsheft. <abbr>No.</abbr> 138).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-859" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-860" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i>Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 588.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-860" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-861" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Sutherland Rattray, Some <i>Folk-lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 118 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-861" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-862" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et Religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 583.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-862" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-863" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Weston, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Geographical Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 143; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 30; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mountaineering and Exploration in the Japanese Alps</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161. The ceremony is not purely magical, for it is intended to attract the attention of the powerful spirit who has a small shrine on the top of the mountain.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-863" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-864" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i>The Ainu and their Folklore</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 333. Some of the ancient processions with ships may perhaps have been rain-charms. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 213⁠–⁠220; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 29. 1, with my note.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-864" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-865" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tournier, <i>Notice sur le Laos Français</i> (Hanoi, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 80. In the temple of the Syrian goddess at Hierapolis on the Euphrates there was a chasm into which water was poured twice a year by people who assembled for the purpose from the whole of Syria and Arabia. See Lucian, <i>De dea Syria</i>, 12 sq. The ceremony was perhaps a rain-charm. Compare Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 18. 7, with my notes.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-865" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-866" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 313 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-866" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-867" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On Australian Medicine-Men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 35; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 398.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-867" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-868" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Salvado, <i>Mémoires historiques sur l’Australie</i> (Paris, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-868" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-869" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stanbridge, “On the Aborigines of Victoria,” <i>Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 300. This use of fire to make rain is peculiar. By analogy we should expect it rather to be resorted to as a mode of stopping rain. See below.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-869" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-870" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. B.</abbr> Noskowÿj, <i>Maqrizii de valle Hadhramaut libellus arabice editus et illustratus</i> (Bonn, 1866), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-870" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-871" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-871" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-872" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rascher, “Die Sulka,” <i>Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 225; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 196 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-872" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-873" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 359.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-873" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-874" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 398.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-874" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-875" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 315.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-875" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-876" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 345 (<i>Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-876" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-877" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i>The Ainu and their Folklore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 333.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-877" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-878" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van Midden Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 2.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-878" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-879" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Crevaux, <i>Voyages dans l’Amérique du Sud</i> (Paris, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 276.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-879" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-880" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Gordon, <i>Indian Folk Tales</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 20; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal and Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, New Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 183.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-880" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-881" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>Ethnological Studies among the North-West-Central Queensland Aborigines</i> (Brisbane and London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 167.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-881" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-882" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 168; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin <abbr>No.</abbr> 5</i> (Brisbane, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 10.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-882" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-883" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Gason, “The Dieyerie Tribe,” <i>Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 276 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “The Dieri and other Kindred Tribes of Central Australia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 394⁠–⁠396. As to the Mura-muras, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 475 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 779 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-883" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-884" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “The Dieri and other Kindred Tribes of Central Australia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 396, 744.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-884" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-885" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 396 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-885" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-886" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kreemer, “Regenmaken, Oedjoeng, Tooverij onder de Javanen,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 113.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-886" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-887" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Coulbeaux, “Au pays de Menelik: à travers l’Abyssinie,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 455.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-887" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-888" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>1 Kings <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 28. From the whole tenour of the narrative it appears that the real contest between Elijah and the prophets of Baal was as to which of them should make rain in a time of drought. The prophets of Baal wrought magic by cutting themselves with knives; Elijah wrought magic by pouring water on the altar. Both ceremonies alike were rain-charms. Compare my note on the passage in <i>Passages of the Bible chosen for their Literary Beauty and Interest</i>, Second Edition (London, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 476 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-888" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-889" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 294⁠–⁠296, 630 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-889" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-890" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Gillen, in <i>Report of the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition to Central Australia</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>., Anthropology (London and Melbourne, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 177⁠–⁠179; Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 189⁠–⁠193.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-890" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-891" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the connection of the plover with rain in Central Australia, see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p259" title="to page 259">259</a>. It is curious that the same association has procured for the bird its name in English, French (<i>pluvier</i>, from the Latin <i>pluvia</i>), and German (<i>Regenpfeifer</i>). Ornithologists are not agreed as to the reason for this association in the popular mind. See Alfred Newton, <i>Dictionary of Birds</i> (London, 1893⁠–⁠1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 730 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-891" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-892" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, “The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 401; <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 350.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-892" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-893" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 108.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-893" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-894" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Fifth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 51 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1889</i>).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-894" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-895" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i>Sixth Report On the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58, 62 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>); <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i>Eleventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1896</i>).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-895" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-896" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 39 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-896" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-897" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>British Central Africa Gazette</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 86 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> no. 6), 30th April 1898, <abbr>p.</abbr> 3.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-897" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-898" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-898" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-899" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Narrative of the Adventures and Sufferings of John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Jewitt</i> (Middletown, 1820), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 173 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<abbr>p.</abbr> 198, Edinburgh, 1824).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-899" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-900" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 310 sq. (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.). The Lillooet Indians of British Columbia also believed that twins were the real offspring of grizzly bears. Many of them said that twins were grizzly bears in human form, and that when a twin died his soul went back to the grizzly bears and became one of them. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Lillooet Indians,” (Leyden and New York, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 263 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-900" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-901" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Baudin, “Le Fétichisme ou la religion des Nègres de la Guinée,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-901" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-902" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i>Die Ewe Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204, 206.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-902" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-903" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 92 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>). The instrument by which the twins make fine weather appears to be a bull-roarer. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Shuswap” (Leyden and New York, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 586 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>.): “Twins were believed to be endowed with powers over the elements, especially over rain and snow. If a twin bathed in a lake or stream, it would rain.”<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-903" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-904" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mark <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 17. If James and John had been twins, we might have suspected that their name of Boanerges had its origin in a superstition like that of the Peruvian Indians. Was it in the character of “sons of thunder” that the brothers proposed to call down fire from heaven on a Samaritan village (Luke <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 54)?<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-904" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-905" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 32, 33, 119, 130, 132.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-905" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-906" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, <i>Les Ba-ronga</i> (Neuchâtel, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 412, 416 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> The reason for calling twins “Children of the Sky” is obscure. Are they supposed in some mysterious way to stand for the sun and moon?<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-906" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-907" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>Savage Childhood</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 47.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-907" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-908" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Reichard, “Die Wanjamuesi,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 256 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Another African superstition as to twins may here be mentioned. On the Slave Coast when a woman has brought forth stillborn twins, she has a statue made with two faces and sets it up in a corner of her house. There she offers it fowls, bananas, and palm-oil in order to obtain the accomplishment of her wishes, and especially a knowledge of the future. See <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1875) <abbr>p.</abbr> 592. This suggests that elsewhere two-faced images, like those of Janus, may have been intended to represent twins.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-908" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-909" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. N.</abbr> Venketswami, “Superstitions among Hindus in the Central Provinces,” <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 111.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-909" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-910" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Grihya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Oxford, 1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 420 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-910" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-911" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. G.</abbr> Batten, <i>Glimpses of the Eastern Archipelago</i> (Singapore, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-911" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-912" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van Midden Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8⁠–⁠10.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-912" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-913" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> W. O’Ferrall, “Native Stories from Santa Cruz and Reef Islands,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 225.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-913" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-914" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucy <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Garnett, <i>The Women of Turkey and their Folklore: The Christian Women</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-914" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-915" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 329 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 493 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i>Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 227 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Schmidt, <i>Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen Siebenbürgens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 17; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i>The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 13; <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 520.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-915" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-916" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Graphic</i>, September 9, 1905, <abbr>p.</abbr> 324; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Emil Fischer, “Paparuda und Scaloian,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xciii</span> (1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 14 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-916" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-917" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 329.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-917" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-918" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Abbott, <i>Macedonian Folklore</i> (Cambridge, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 118 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-918" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-919" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i>Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 228; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 329 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-919" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-920" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p260" title="to page 260">260</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr> This perpetual turning or whirling movement is required of the actors in other European ceremonies of a superstitious character. See below, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 74, 80, 81, 87. I am far from feeling sure that the explanation of it suggested in the text is the true one. But I do not remember to have met with any other.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-920" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-921" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. S.</abbr> Moore, in <i>The Cowley Evangelist</i>, May 1908, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 111 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-921" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-922" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i> (Leipzig, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 93 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-922" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-923" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris, <abbr>MS.</abbr> notes of folklore collected in the East.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-923" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-924" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rendel Harris, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-924" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-925" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. I.</abbr> Curtiss, <i>Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 114.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-925" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-926" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Jaussen, <i>Coutumes des Arabes au pays de Moab</i> (Paris, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 326, 328.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-926" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-927" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Polek, “Regenzauber in Osteuropa,” <i>Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 85. For the bathing of the priest compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 331, note 2.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-927" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-928" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 331.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-928" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-929" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Rutenen in der Bukowina und Galizien,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 281.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-929" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-930" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i> (Leipzig, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-930" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-931" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 584.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-931" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-932" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, “De Minahasa in 1825,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 524.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-932" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-933" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van Midden Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-933" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-934" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Joustra, “De Zending onder de Karo-Batak’s,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 158.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-934" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-935" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 134, § 285.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-935" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-936" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 73 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-936" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-937" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-937" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-938" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sarat Chandra Mitra, “On some Ceremonies for producing Rain,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25, 27; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 136, § 373.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-938" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-939" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 102, § 791.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-939" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-940" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 74 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-940" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-941" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sarat Chandra Mitra, “On Vestiges of Moon-worship in Behar and Bengal,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 598 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-941" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-942" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 42, § 256; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 16 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Sarat Chandra Mitra, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 597 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 482.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-942" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-943" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Hunter, <i>Orissa</i> (London, 1872), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 140 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 17.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-943" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-944" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Logan, <i>Malabar</i> (Madras, 1887), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 161 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 287; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. K.</abbr> Anantha Krishna Iyer, <i>The Cochin Tribes and Castes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Madras, 1909) <abbr>p.</abbr> 238.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-944" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-945" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, <i>Die Huzulen</i> (Vienna, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 63; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Viehzucht und Viehzauber in den Ostkarpaten,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 386.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-945" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-946" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Cabaton, <i>Nouvelles Recherches sur les Chams</i> (Paris, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 48.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-946" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-947" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 90 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-947" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-948" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Krause, “Abergläubische Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin und nächster Umgebung,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 87.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-948" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-949" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>Historia plantarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3. 3, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 8. 8; Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Convivales</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 2. 3; Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 120.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-949" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-950" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Palladius, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 9; Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 120.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-950" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-951" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>Historia plantarum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 8. 8.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-951" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-952" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lactantius, <i>Divinarum Institutionum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 21; Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 5. 11. 8; Philostratus, <i>Imagines</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 24; Conon, in Photius, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 132, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bekker. Lactantius speaks of the sacrifice of a pair of oxen, Philostratus of the sacrifice of a single ox.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-952" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-953" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Die Pschawen und Chewsurier im Kaukasus,” <i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, N.F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1857) <abbr>p.</abbr> 75.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-953" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-954" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i> (Leipzig, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-954" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-955" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Reinegg, <i>Beschreibung des Kaukasus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Hildesheim and <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1797), <abbr>p.</abbr> 114. Among the Abchases of the Western Caucasus girls make rain by driving an ass into a river, placing a puppet dressed as a woman on a raft, and letting the raft float down stream. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> von Seidlitz, “Die Abchasen,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvi</span>. (1894) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-955" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-956" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 553; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i>The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 40.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-956" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-957" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 41, 115, §§ 173, 513.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-957" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-958" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 210, § 1161.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-958" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-959" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sarat Chandra Mitra, “On the Har Paraurī, or the Behari Women’s Ceremony for producing Rain,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 471⁠–⁠484; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 7 (1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 384⁠–⁠388.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-959" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-960" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sarat Chandra Mitra, “On some Ceremonies for producing Rain,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 25. On these Indian rain-charms compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 68 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland suggests that such customs furnish the key to the legend of Lady Godiva (<i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 223 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). Some of the features of the ceremonies, though not the ploughing, reappear in a rain-charm practised by the Rajbansis of Bengal. The women make two images of Hudum Deo out of mud or cow-dung, and carry them away into the fields by night. There they strip themselves naked, and dance round the images singing obscene songs. See (Sir) <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Risley, <i>The Tribes and Castes of Bengal: Ethnographic Glossary</i> (Calcutta, 1891⁠–⁠92), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 498. Again, in time of drought the Kapu women of Southern India mould a small figure of a naked human being to represent Jokumara, the rain-god. This they place in a mock palanquin and go about for several days from door to door, singing indecent songs and collecting alms. Then they abandon the figure in a field, where the Malas find it and go about with it in their turn for three or four days, singing ribald songs and collecting alms. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 244 <abbr>sq.</abbr> We have seen (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 267 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) that lewd songs form part of an African rain-charm. The link between ribaldry and rain is not obvious to the European mind.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-960" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-961" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 302 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-961" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-962" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Houghton, in <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 112.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-962" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-963" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 330.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-963" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-964" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 345 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-964" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-965" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 116; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-965" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-966" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i>The Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 425 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; P. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Stenin, “Ueber den Geisterglauben in Russland,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lvii</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 285.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-966" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-967" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristophanes, <i>Clouds</i>, 373.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-967" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-968" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-968" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-969" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris, <abbr>MS.</abbr> notes.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-969" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-970" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Elliot, <i>Experiences of a Planter in the Jungles of Mysore</i> (London, 1871), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 76 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-970" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-971" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijving bij de Toradja’s van Central Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 6, citing <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Baarda.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-971" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-972" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mela, <i>Chorographia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 106.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-972" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-973" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-973" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-974" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p268" title="to page 268">268</a>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-974" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-975" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-975" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-976" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Missionar <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. H.</abbr> Brincker, “Beobachlungen über die Deisidämonie der Eingeborenen Deutsch-Südwest-Afrikas,” <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lviii</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 323; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i>Mitteilungen des Seminars für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abteilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 89.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-976" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-977" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Caulin, <i>Historia coro-graphica natural y evangelica dela Nueva Andalucia, Provincias de Cumaña, Guayana y Vertientes del Rio Orinoco</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 92.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-977" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-978" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i>The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 918 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-978" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-979" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 314 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-979" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-980" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 311.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-980" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-981" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Grinnell, <i>Blackfoot Lodge Tales</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-981" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-982" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 374 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-982" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-983" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i>Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 446.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-983" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-984" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i>The Ainu and their Folklore</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 334.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-984" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-985" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(Sir) <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Scott, <i>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Rangoon, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 280.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-985" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-986" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-986" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-987" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 507.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-987" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-988" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Jaussen, “Coutumes arabes,” <i>Revue Biblique</i>, April 1903, <abbr>p.</abbr> 248. Elsewhere the same writer describes this ceremony as a mode of putting a stop to cholera. See his <i>Coutumes des Arabes au pays de Moab</i> (Paris, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 362. To pass between the pieces of a sacrificial victim is a form of oath (Genesis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 9 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Jeremiah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span> 18; Dictys Cretensis, <i>Bell. Trojan.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 15; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Moffat, <i>Missionary Labours and Scenes in Southern Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 278) or of purification (Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 111; Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 13. 7; Livy, xl. 6; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <i>The Basutos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 256; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Krascheninnikow, <i>Beschreibung des Landes Kamtschatka</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 277 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). Compare my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 20. 9.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-988" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-989" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, “Over de <i>âdá’s</i> of gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegineezen,” <i>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Derde Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Amsterdam, 1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-989" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-990" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A. J.</abbr> Hazeu, “Kleine bijdragen tot de ethnografie en folklore van Java,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-990" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-991" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Hillebrandt, <i>Vedische Opfer und Zauber</i> (Strasburg, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 120.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-991" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-992" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 583.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-992" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-993" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Acosta, <i>History of the Indies</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 376, Hakluyt Society).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-993" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-994" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Shooter, <i>The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country</i> (London, 1857), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-994" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-995" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i>Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 188.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-995" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-996" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 325.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-996" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-997" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Decle, <i>Three Years in Savage Africa</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 154.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-997" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-998" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, <i>Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 320 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-998" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-999" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. T.</abbr> Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 88.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-999" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Folklore Journal, edited by the Working Committee of the South African Folklore Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 34.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1000" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1001" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S. G.</abbr> Gramberg, “Eene maand in de binnenlanden van Timor,” <i>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 209; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Zondervan, “Timor en de Timoreezen,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>. Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1888) Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 402 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1001" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1002" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Wiese, “Beiträge zur Geschichte der Zulu im Norden des Zambesi, namentlich der Angoni,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1002" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1003" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Weston, <i>Mountaineering and Exploration in the Japanese Alps</i> (London, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 30; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Geographical Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 143 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1003" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1004" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Caulin, <i>Historia Coro-graphica natural y evangelica dela Nueva Andalucia, Provincias de Cumaña, Guayana y Vertientes del Rio Orinoco</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 96; <i>Colombia, being a geographical, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, account of the country</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 642 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i>Die Culturländer des alten Amerika</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 216.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1004" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1005" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Forbes, “On the Aymara Indians of Bolivia and Peru,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 237, note. On the supposed relation of the frog or toad to water in America, see further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Payne, <i>History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 420 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 425 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> He observes that “throughout the New World, from Florida to Chile, the worship of the frog or toad, as the offspring of water and the symbol of the water-spirit, accompanied the cultivation of maize” (<abbr>p.</abbr> 425). A species of water toad is called by the Araucanians of Chili <i>genco</i>, “which signifies lord of the water, as they believe that it watches over the preservation and contributes to the salubrity of the waters” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. I.</abbr> Molina, <i>Geographical, Natural, and Civil History of Chili</i>, London, 1809, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 179).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1005" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1006" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Folklore and Legends of some Victorian Tribes</i> (in manuscript). The story is told in an abridged form by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 54 <abbr>sq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1006" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1007" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p255" title="to page 255">255</a>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1007" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1008" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i>Memoirs of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 346; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn, <i>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 80, § 244; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i>The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 13.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1008" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1009" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. N.</abbr> Venketswami, “Superstitions among Hindus in the Central Provinces,” <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 111. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 387.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1009" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1010" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 134, § 285; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 73.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1010" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1011" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxii</span>., part 3, Anthropology (Calcutta, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 39.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1011" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1012" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 245.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1012" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1013" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 387.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1013" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1014" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, “On the ‘Frog-hymn,’ Rig Veda, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 103,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 173⁠–⁠179.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1014" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1015" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> Waddell, “Frog-Worship among the Newars,” <i>The Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 292⁠–⁠294. The title Bhûmînâtha, “Lord or Protector of the Soil,” is specially reserved for the frog. The title Paremêsvara is given to all the Newar divinities.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1015" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1016" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopaedia Britannica</i>, 9th edition, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Frog,” <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 796. For an instance of a frog thus caught in a drought and made to disgorge its hoard of water, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i>Voyage dans le Laos</i> (Paris, 1895⁠–⁠1897), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 284 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1016" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1017" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 295.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1017" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1018" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Wlislocki, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigenner</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1018" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1019" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 76.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1019" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1020" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 74.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1020" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1021" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Weston, <i>Mountaineering and Exploration in the Japanese Alps</i> (London, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 162.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1021" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1022" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Les Peuplades de la Sénégambie</i> (Paris, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 291.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1022" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1023" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Lange, “Bitten um Regen in Japan,” <i>Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 334 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i>Shinto</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 153. However, the throwing of the dragon into the waterfall may be a homoeopathic charm rather than a punishment.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1023" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1024" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i>Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 520.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1024" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1025" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Huc, <i>L’Empire chinois</i>⁴ (Paris, 1862), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 241.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1025" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1026" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr Rizzolati, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1844) <abbr>p.</abbr> 350; Mgr Retord, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1856) <abbr>p.</abbr> 102. In Tonquin also a mandarin has been known to whip an image of Buddha for not sending rain. See <i>Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1830) <abbr>p.</abbr> 330.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1026" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1027" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Huc, <i>L’Empire chinois</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 241 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1027" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1028" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, Nouvelle Édition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 210.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1028" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1029" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Bertrand, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1850) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 351⁠–⁠355; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Rockhill, <i>The Land of the Lamas</i> (London, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 311.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1029" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1030" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. Z.</abbr> Simmons, “Idols and Spirits,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 502.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1030" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1031" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr Bruguière, in <i>Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1831), <abbr>p.</abbr> 131.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1031" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1032" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brien, “Aperçu sur la province de Battambang,” <i>Cochinchine Française: excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 25 (Saigon, 1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1032" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1033" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Vuillier, “La Sicile, impressions du présent et du passé,” <i>Tour du monde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvii</span>. (1894) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 54 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Pitrè, <i>Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Palermo, 1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142⁠–⁠144. As to <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis of Paola, who died in 1507 and was canonised by Leo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> in 1519, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Ribadeneira, <i>Flos Sanctorum, cioè Vite de’ Santi</i> (Venice, 1763), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 252 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Th. Trede, <i>Das Heidentum in der römischen Kirche</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 45⁠–⁠47; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Pitrè, <i>Feste patronali in Sicilia</i> (Turin and Palermo, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> He was sent for by Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of France, and his fame as a worker of miracles is still spread over all the south of Italy. With the entertainments given in honour of <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis of Paola to wheedle rain out of him we may compare the shadow-plays or puppet-shows given by the Javanese and the comedies played by the Chinese for the same purpose. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. S.</abbr> Raffles, <i>History of Java</i> (London, 1817), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 477; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A. J.</abbr> Hazen, “Kleine bijdragen tot de ethnografie en de folklore van Java,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Huc, <i>L’Empire chinois</i>⁴ (Paris, 1862), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 241.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1033" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1034" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Biddulph, <i>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i> (Calcutta, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 95.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1034" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1035" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Albîrûnî, <i>The Chronology of Ancient Nations</i>, translated and edited by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. E.</abbr> Sachau (London, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 235. This and the following passage were pointed out to me by my late friend, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1035" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1036" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Albîrûnî, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1036" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1037" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gervasius von Tilbury, <i>Otia Imperialia</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Liebrecht, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 41 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1037" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1038" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Giraldus Cambrensis, <i>Topography of Ireland</i>, ch. 7. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 341 note.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1038" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1039" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Lecœur, <i>Esquisses du Bocage Normand</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 79.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1039" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1040" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 473.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1040" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1041" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Cadière, “Croyances et dictons populaires de la Vallée du Nguôn-son, Province de Quang-binh (Annam),” <i>Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Hanoi, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1041" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1042" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 194.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1042" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1043" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i>Religious System of the Amazulu</i>, part. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 407 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1043" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1044" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1044" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1045" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Reclus, <i>Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 100.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1045" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1046" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 135, § 285; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 77.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1046" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1047" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van Midden Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 2.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1047" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1048" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rasmussen, <i>Additamenta ad historiam Arabum ante Islamismum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Goldziher, <i>Muhammedanische Studien</i> (Halle a. S., 1888⁠–⁠1890), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 34 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1048" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1049" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Wellhausen, <i>Reste arabischen Heidentums</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 157 (first edition).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1049" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1050" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Labat, <i>Relation historique de l’Éthiopie occidentale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 180.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1050" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1051" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ternaux-Compans, <i>Essai sur l’ancien Cundinamarca</i> (Paris, n.d.), <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1051" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1052" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1052" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1053" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L. P.</abbr> Cameron, “Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 362. For other uses of quartz-crystal in ceremonies for the making of rain, see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p254" title="to page 254">254</a>, 255.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1053" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1054" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L. P.</abbr> Cameron, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i>The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 377.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1054" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1055" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Clement, “Ethnographical Notes on the Western Australian Aborigines,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1055" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1056" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Rascher, “Die Sulka,” <i>Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 225. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 196.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1056" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1057" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The <i>genna</i> amongst the Tribes of Assam,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 96.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1057" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1058" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i>Shinto</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 330.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1058" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1059" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i>Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 654.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1059" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1060" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 218, § 776; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 75 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1060" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1061" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rendel Harris, <abbr>MS.</abbr> notes.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1061" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1062" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R.</abbr> Paton, in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 216.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1062" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1063" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Timkowski, <i>Travels of the Russian Mission through Mongolia to China</i> (London, 1827), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 402 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1063" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1064" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. H.</abbr> Cottrell, <i>Recollections of Siberia</i> (London, 1842), <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1064" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1065" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Radloff, <i>Aus Sibirien</i> (Leipzig, 1884), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 179 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1065" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1066" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The American Antiquarian</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 339. Vivid descriptions of the scenery and climate of Arizona and New Mexico will be found in Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke’s <i>On the Border with Crook</i> (New York, 1891); see, for example, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 12 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 30 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 34 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 41 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 185, 190 <abbr>sq.</abbr> See also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Mindeleff, in <i>Seventeenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part 2 (Washington, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 477⁠–⁠481.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1066" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1067" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1067" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1068" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys, <i>Celtic Heathendom</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 184; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 494; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 190 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Nore, <i>Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de France</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 216; San Marte, <i>Die Arthur Sage</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 105 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 153 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1068" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1069" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys, <i>Celtic Heathendom</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, quoting an earlier authority.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1069" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1070" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 187. The same thing is done at the fountain of Sainte Anne, near Gevezé, in Brittany. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <i>Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 72.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1070" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1071" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Herve, “Quelques superstitions de Morvan,” <i>Bulletins de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris</i>, 4me série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 530.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1071" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1072" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bérenger-Féraud and de Mortillet, in <i>Bulletins de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris</i>, 4me série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 306, 310 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 427.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1072" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1073" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Brun, <i>Historie critique des pratiques superstitieuses</i> (Amsterdam, 1733), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 245 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 477. For more examples of such customs in France see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <i>Le Folk-lore de France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 376⁠–⁠378.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1073" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1074" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lamberti, “Relation de la Colchide ou Mingrélie,” <i>Voyages au Nord</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 174 (Amsterdam, 1725).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1074" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1075" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. S.</abbr> Hallett, <i>A Thousand Miles on an Elephant in the Shan States</i> (Edinburgh and London, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 264.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1075" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1076" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin, “Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 594.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1076" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1077" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1077" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1078" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 86. As to the cat in rainmaking ceremonies, see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p289" title="to page 289">289</a>, 291.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1078" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1079" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Myron Eels, “The Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of Washington Territory,” <i>Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 674.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1079" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1080" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to such prayers, see Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 25. 10; Marcus Antoninus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 7; Petronius, 44; Tertullian, <i>Apolog.</i> 40, compare 22 and 23; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Cauer, <i>Delectus Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 162; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Collitz und <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Bechtel, <i>Sammlung der griechischen Dialekt-Inschriften</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3718; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1004; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Luders, <i>Die dionysischen Künstler</i> (Berlin, 1873), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1080" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1081" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 38. 4.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1081" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1082" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p248" title="to page 248">248</a>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1082" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1083" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antigonus, <i>Historiarum mirabilium</i> 15 (<i>Scriptores rerum mirabilium Graeci</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Westermann, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). Antigonus mentions that the badge of the city was a representation of the chariot with a couple of ravens perched on it. This badge appears on existing coins of Crannon, with the addition of a pitcher resting on the chariot (B. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Head, <i>Historia Numorum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 249). Hence <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Furtwängler conjectured, with great probability, that a pitcher full of water was placed on the real chariot when rain was wanted, and that the spilling of the water, as the chariot shook, was intended to imitate a shower of rain. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Furtwängler, <i>Meisterwerke der griechischen Plastik</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257⁠–⁠263.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1083" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1084" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p248" title="to page 248">248</a>, 251.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1084" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1085" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 9. 7; Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 585 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Servius on Virgil, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1085" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1086" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vv</span> aquaelicium</i> and <i>manalem lapidem</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 2, 128, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller; Nonius Marcellus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> trullum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 637, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Quicherat; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 175; Fulgentius, “Expositio sermonum antiquorum” <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> manales lapides</i>, <i>Mythogr. Lat.</i> <abbr>ed.</abbr> Staveren, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 769 <abbr>sq.</abbr> It has been suggested that the stone derived its name and its virtue from the <i>manes</i> or spirits of the dead (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Hoffmann, in <i>Rheinisches Museum für Philologie</i>, N.F. l. (1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 484⁠–⁠486). <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Gilbert supposes that the stone was hollow and filled with water which was poured out in imitation of rain. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Gilbert, <i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Leipzig, 1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 154 note. His suggestion is thus exactly parallel to that of Furtwängler as to the pitcher at Crannon (above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p309" title="to page 309">309</a> note 6). Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 232 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1086" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1087" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nonius Marcellus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> aquilex</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Quicherat. In favour of taking <i>aquilex</i> as rainmaker is the use of <i>aquaelicium</i> in the sense of rainmaking. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K. O.</abbr> Müller, <i>Die Etrusker</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Deecke, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 318 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1087" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1088" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 55.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1088" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1089" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Philochorus, cited by Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> 72, <abbr>p.</abbr> 656 <b>A</b>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1089" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1090" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the Barotse, on the upper Zambesi, “the sorcerers or witch-doctors go from village to village with remedies which they cook in great cauldrons to make rain” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bertrand, <i>The Kingdom of the Barotsi</i>, London, 1899, <abbr>p.</abbr> 277).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1090" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1091" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Phylarchus, cited by Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 48, <abbr>p.</abbr> 693 <b>E F</b>. If the conjectural reading τοῖς Ἐμεσηνοῖς were adopted in place of the manuscript reading τοῖς Ἕλλησιν, we should have to suppose that the custom was not observed by the Greeks, but by the people of Emesa in Syria, where there was a famous worship of the sun. But Polemo, the highest authority in such matters, tells us that the Athenians offered “sober” sacrifices to the sun and to other deities (Scholia on Sophocles, <i>Oed. Colon</i>, 100); and in a Greek inscription found at Piraeus we read of offerings to the sun and of three “sober altars,” by which no doubt are meant altars on which wine was not poured. See Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 672; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge inscriptionum Graecorum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 631; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Roberts, <i>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 133; <i>Leges Graecorum sacrae</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> de Prott et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Ziehen, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 18. In the passage of Athenaeus, accordingly, the reading τοῖς Ἐμεσηνοῖς, which has been rashly adopted by the latest editor of Athenaeus (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kaibel), may be safely rejected in favour of the manuscript reading.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1091" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1092" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Jones, <i>History of the Ojebway Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1092" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1093" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Smyth and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Lowe, <i>Narrative of a Journey from Lima to Para</i> (London, 1836), <abbr>p.</abbr> 230. An eclipse either of the sun or the moon is commonly supposed by savages to be caused by a monster who is trying to devour the luminary, and accordingly they discharge missiles and raise a clamour in order to drive him away. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i>Primitive Culture</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 328 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1093" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1094" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Gumilla, <i>Histoire de l’Orénoque</i> (Avignon, 1758), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 243 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1094" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1095" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Krascheninnikow, <i>Beschreibung des Landes Kamtschatka</i> (Lemgo, 1766), <abbr>p.</abbr> 217.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1095" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1096" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice, “The Western Dénés, their Manners and Customs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Canadian Institute, Toronto</i>, Third Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1888⁠–⁠89) <abbr>p.</abbr> 154.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1096" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1097" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <i>Le Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 90 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 98.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1097" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1098" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Isis et Osiris</i>, 52. The Eskimo of Bering Strait give the name of “the sun’s walking-stick” to the vertical bar in a parhelion. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i>Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 449.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1098" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1099" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 216; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Glaumont, “Usages, mœurs et coutumes des Néo-Calédoniens,” <i>Revue d’ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 116.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1099" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 116; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 296 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The magic formula differs slightly in the two passages; in the text I have followed the second.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Arbousset et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Daumas, <i>Voyage d’exploration au nord-est de la Colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</i> (Paris, 1842), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 350 <abbr>sq.</abbr> For the kinship with the sacred object (totem) from which the clan takes its name, see <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 350, 422, 424. Other people have claimed kindred with the sun, as the Natchez of North America (<i>Voyages au nord</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 24) and the Incas of Peru.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kurze, “Sitten und Gebräuche der Lengua-Indianer,” <i>Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 17.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 278; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>The Melanesians</i> (Oxford, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 184.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p291" title="to page 291">291</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 346. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p284" title="to page 284">284</a>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. d’Orbigny, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Paris and Strasburg, 1844) <abbr>p.</abbr> 24.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Solomon, “Extracts from Diaries kept in Car Nicobar,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 213.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 328 (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Payne, <i>History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Oxford, 1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 520⁠–⁠523; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Th. Preuss, in <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner anthropologischen Gesellschaft</i>, November 15, 1902, <abbr>pp.</abbr> (449) <abbr>sq.</abbr>, (457) <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Die Feuergötter als Ausgangspunkt zum Verständnis der mexikanischen Religion,” <i>Mitteilungen der anthropolog. Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 163. A Mexican legend relates how in the beginning the gods sacrificed themselves by fire in order to set the sun in motion. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i>Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> ch. 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 478 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (French translated by Jourdanet and Simeon).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “October equus,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 181, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>2 Kings <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span> 11. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Zimmern, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Schrader’s <i>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</i>³ (Berlin, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 369 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 20. 4.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i>Cyropaed.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 3. 24; Philostratus, <i>Vita Apollonii</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 31. 2; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 385 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 20. 4. Compare Xenophon, <i>Anabasis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 5. 35; Trogus Pompeius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 10. 5.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 216; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 8. 6. On the sacrifice of horses see further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Bochart, <i>Hierozoicon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> coll. 175 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Negelein, in <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62⁠–⁠66. Many Asiatics held that the sun rode a horse, not a chariot. See Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,² <abbr>No.</abbr> 754, with note⁴.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 174. The name of the place is Andahuayllas.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Williams, <i>Fiji and the Fijians</i>², <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 250.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fison’s letter is dated August 26, 1898.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i>The American Indians</i> (Buffalo, 1851), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Oneota</i> (New York and London, 1845), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i>Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 200 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i>Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 151.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Zündel, “Land und Volk der Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in Westafrika,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1877) <abbr>p.</abbr> 411. We have met with a somewhat similar charm in North Africa to bring back a runaway slave. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p152" title="to page 152">152</a>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, <i>Pioneering in New Guinea</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 172.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aeneas Sylvius, <i>Opera</i> (Bâle, 1571), <abbr>p.</abbr> 418 [wrongly numbered 420]; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Thevet, <i>Cosmographie universelle</i> (Paris, 1575), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 851.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i>Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 334; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i>The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 50.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Fancourt, <i>History of Yucatan</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 118; Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 51.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. L.</abbr> Cummins, “Sub-tribes of the Bahr-el-Ghazal Dinkas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(<i>South African</i>) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Folklore Journal</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Capetown, 1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 34; Dudley Kidd, <i>Savage Childhood</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gottschling, “The Bawenda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 381.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i> (London, 1845), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 365. The Ovakumbi of Angola place a stone in the fork of a tree as a memorial at any place where they have learned something which they wish to remember. See Ch. Wunenberger, “La Mission et le royaume de Humbé,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 270.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i>The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 145.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, <i>Komm herüber und hilf uns! oder die Arbeit der Neuen-Dettelsauer Mission in Deutsch Neu-Guinea</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Barmen, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 29; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Hagen’s <i>Unter den Papua’s</i> (Wiesbaden, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. M.</abbr> Dawson, “Notes on the Shuswap People of British Columbia,” <i>Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1901, pub. 1902) section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 38.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Gmelin, <i>Reise durch Sibirien</i> (Göttingen, 1751⁠–⁠52), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 510.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. H.</abbr> Cottrell, <i>Recollections of Siberia</i> (London, 1842), <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Owen Dorsey, “Omaha Sociology,” <i>Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 241; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “A Study of Siouan Cults,” <i>Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 410.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. M.</abbr> Dawson, “On the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands,” <i>Geological Survey of Canada, Report of Progress for 1878⁠–⁠1879</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 124 <b>B</b>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Powell, <i>Wanderings in a Wild Country</i> (London, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i>Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 389.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Mission scientifique du Cap Horn</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (Paris, 1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Richardson, <i>A Dictionary of Persian, Arabic, and English</i>, New Edition (London, 1829), <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1636, <abbr>p.</abbr> 38 (Canadian reprint). On the other hand, some of the New South Wales aborigines thought that a wished-for wind would not rise if shellfish were roasted at night (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <i>Account of the English Colony in New South Wales</i>, London, 1804, <abbr>p.</abbr> 382).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i>Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 387 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1830) <abbr>p.</abbr> 482.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Ethnographische Beschrijving der Kei Eilanden,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 827.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 200, 201.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Palmer, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201, note.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>Savage Childhood</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 151.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Hagen, <i>Unter den Papua’s</i> (Wiesbaden, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 269.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Monckton, “Some Recollections of New Guinea Customs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i>The Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 248.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 26 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i>Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 60; <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (Cambridge, 1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin, “Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 627; Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Gordon Cumming, <i>In the Hebrides</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 166 sq.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Fraser, in Sir John Sinclair’s <i>Statistical Account of Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (Edinburgh, 1793) <abbr>p.</abbr> 52, note.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1854), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 105 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, “The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 401 sq.; <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Cambridge, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 351 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 352.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Folklore and Legends of some Victorian Tribes</i> (in manuscript).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p263" title="to page 263">263</a>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Egede, <i>Description of Greenland</i>, second edition (London, 1818), <abbr>p.</abbr> 196, note.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hesychius and Suidas, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> ἀνεμοκοῖται; Eustathius, on Homer, <i>Odyssey</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 22, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1645. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Töpffer, <i>Attische Genealogie</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 112, who conjectures that the Eudanemi or Heudanemi at Athens may also have claimed the power of lulling the winds.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eunapius, <i>Vitae sophistarum: Aedesius</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 463, Didot edition.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 294. Compare <i>Geoponica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 18.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Olaus Magnus, <i>Gentium Septentrionalibus historia.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 15.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 107 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dana, <i>Two Years before the Mast</i>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Scheffer, <i>Lapponia</i> (Frankfurt, 1673), <abbr>p.</abbr> 144; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Train, <i>Account of the Isle of Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 166; Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Gordon Cumming, <i>In the Hebrides</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 254 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Ch. Rogers, <i>Social Life in Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 220; Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Scott, <i>Pirate</i>, note to ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>.; Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Cameron, in <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 301 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Shakespeare, <i>Macbeth</i>, Act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. Sc. 3, line 11. “But, my loving master, if any wind will not serve, then I wish I were in Lapland, to buy a good wind of one of the honest witches, that sell so many winds there and so cheap” (Izaac Walton, <i>Compleat Angler</i>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Lockhart, <i>Memoirs of the Life of Sir Walter Scott</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 203 (first edition).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, commentatio</i> (Copenhagen, 1767), <abbr>p.</abbr> 454.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Homer, <i>Odyssey</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 19 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> It is said that Perdoytus, the Lithuanian Aeolus, keeps the winds enclosed in a leathern bag; when they escape from it he pursues them, beats them, and shuts them up again. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Veckenstedt, <i>Die Mythen, Sagen und Legenden der Zamaiten</i> (Litauer), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 153. The statements of this writer, however, are to be received with caution.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, <i>Pioneering in New Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 177.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Herold, in <i>Mitteilungen aus den deutschen Schutzgebieten</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 144 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Klose, <i>Togo unter deutscher Flagge</i> (Berlin, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 189.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i>Religion and Myth</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 7.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Central Eskimo,” <i>Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 593.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Arctic Papers for the Expedition of 1875</i> (Royal Geographical Society), <abbr>p.</abbr> 274.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Murdoch, “Ethnological Results of the Point Barrow Expedition,” <i>Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 432 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Bloomfield, <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 249 (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>.); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Livinhac, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. (1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 209.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Perham, “Sea Dyak Religion,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 10 (December 1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 241 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 201; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i>In Centraal Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1900), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 180 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The people of Samarcand used to beat drums and dance in the eleventh month to demand cold weather, and they threw water on one another. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Chavannes, <i>Les Tou-Kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 135.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i>Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 24 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sébillot, <i>Coutumes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 302 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Holzmayer, “Osiliana,” <i>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 54.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn und <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 454, § 406; Von Alpenburg, <i>Mythen und Sagen Tirols</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262, 365 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i>Die Götter der deutschen und nordischen Völker</i> (Berlin, 1860), <abbr>p.</abbr> 99; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 109; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 117. In some parts of Austria and Germany, when a storm is raging, the people open a window and throw out a handful of meal, saying to the wind, “There, that’s for you, stop!” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Peter, <i>Volksthümliches aus österreichisch-Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 259; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>,⁴ <abbr>p.</abbr> 529; Zingerle, <i>Sitten Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</i>,² <abbr>p.</abbr> 118, § 1046. Similarly an old Irishwoman has been seen to fling handfuls of grass into a cloud of dust blown along a road, and she explained her behaviour by saying that she wished to give something to the fairies who were playing in the dust (<i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 352). But these are sacrifices to appease, not ceremonies to constrain the spirits of the air; thus they belong to the domain of religion rather than to that of magic. The ancient Greeks sacrificed to the winds. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Stengel, “Die Opfer der Hellenen an die Winde,” <i>Hermes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1881) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 346⁠–⁠350; and my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 12. 1.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Kohl, <i>Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 278.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kurze, “Sitten und Gebräuche der Lengua-Indianer,” <i>Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 17.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> de Azara, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 137.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Lozano, <i>Descripcion chorographica del Gran Chaco</i> (Cordova, 1733), <abbr>p.</abbr> 71; Charlevoix, <i>Histoire du Paraguay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 74; Guevara, <i>Historia del Paraguay</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23 (in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> de Angelis’s <i>Coleccion de obras y documentos</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., Buenos Aires, 1836); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> de Alvear, <i>Relacion geografica e historica de la provincia de Misiones</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 14 (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> de Angelis, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. A.</abbr> Henry, “Bijdrage tot de Kennis der Bataklanden,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i>Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leyden, 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 97.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i>Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 457 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 270; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 194, note; Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 632.<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Cornwallis Harris, <i>The Highlands of Ethiopia</i> (London, 1844), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 352. Compare Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nord-ost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 28. Even where these columns or whirlwinds of dust are not attacked they are still regarded with awe. The Ainos believe them to be filled with demons; hence they will hide behind a tree and spit profusely if they see one coming (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i>The Ainu and their Folklore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 385). In some parts of India they are supposed to be <i>bhuts</i> going to bathe in the Ganges (Denzil <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. J.</abbr> Ibbetson, <i>Settlement Report of the Panipat, Tahsil, and Karnal Parganah of the Karnal District</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 154). The Chevas and Tumbucas of South Africa fancy them to be the wandering souls of sorcerers (<i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (Berlin, 1856) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 301 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). The Baganda and the Pawnees believe them to be ghosts (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 73; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Grinnell, <i>Pawnee Hero-Stories and Folk-tales</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 357). Californian Indians think that they are happy souls ascending to the heavenly land (Stephen Powers, <i>Tribes of California</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 328). Once when a great Fijian chief died, a whirlwind swept across the lagoon. An old man who saw it covered his mouth with his hand and said in an awestruck whisper, “There goes his spirit!” (<abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated August 26, 1898).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 173; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 11. The Cimbrians are said to have taken arms against the tide (Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 2. 1).<a href="chapter-1-5.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The government of the western islanders of Torres Straits is similar. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, in <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 263 <abbr>sq.</abbr> So, too, the Bantoc Igorot of the Philippines have no chiefs and are ruled by councils of old men. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. E.</abbr> Jenks, <i>The Bantoc Igorot</i> (Manila; 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 167 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9⁠–⁠15, 154, 159⁠–⁠205; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 20⁠–⁠27, 285⁠–⁠297, 309 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 316; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 320⁠–⁠326.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 303.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 313.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 314.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297⁠–⁠299. For more examples of headmen who are also magicians see <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 301 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 302, 317.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scott Nind, “Description of the Natives of King George’s Sound (Swan River Colony),” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1832) <abbr>p.</abbr> 41.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> MacGregor, <i>British New Guinea</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 41.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Guis, “Les Papous,” <i>Les Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 334.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, “Toaripi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 334.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Beardmore, “The Natives of Mowat Daudai, New Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 464.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <i>The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 455 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i>Neu-Guinea</i> (Berlin, n.d.), <abbr>p.</abbr> 334.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i> (Oxford, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 46.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 52. As to the <i>mana</i> or supernatural power of chiefs and others, see <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 118 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p227" title="to page 227">227</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr> I have pointed out (<abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p111" title="to page 111">111</a>, note 2) that this supernatural power supplies, as it were, the physical basis of magic.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Deniau, “Croyances religieuses et mœurs des indigènes de l’île Malo (Nouvelles-Hébrides),” <i>Les Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 347.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Ribbe, <i>Zwei Jahren unter den Kannibalen der Salomo-Inseln</i> (Dresden-Blasewitz, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 173 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <i>The Melanesians of New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 702.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Brown, D.D., <i>Melanesians and Polynesians</i> (London, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 270.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Brown, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 429.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 320⁠–⁠322.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p175" title="to page 175">175</a>.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i>Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 187 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 173.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 321.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 830.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i>Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baron <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. C.</abbr> von der Decken, <i>Reisen in Ost-Afrika</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Leipzig and Heidelberg, 1871) <abbr>p.</abbr> 24.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i>Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18 <abbr>sq.</abbr> I have slightly abridged the writer’s account.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i>Die Masai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 21. As to the medicine-men of the Masai, see further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i>The Masai</i> (Oxford, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 324⁠–⁠330.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i>Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i>The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 851.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 779.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E. R.</abbr> Cole, “African Rain-making Chiefs, the Gondokoro District, White Nile,” <i>Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1910) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 90⁠–⁠92; Yuzbashi, “Tribes on the Upper Nile,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 14 (January, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Brun-Rollet, <i>Le Nil Blanc et le Soudan</i> (Paris, 1855), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 227 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Spire, “Rain-making in Equatorial Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 17 (October, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15⁠–⁠21.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Emin Pasha, quoted by <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i>Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 778⁠–⁠780.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Spire, “Rain-making in Equatorial Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 17 (October, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16⁠–⁠18, 21.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Schweinfurth, <i>The Heart of Africa</i>³ (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 144 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. D.</abbr> Pruyssenaere, “Reisen und Forschungen im Gebiete des Weissen und Blauen Nil,” <i>Petermanns Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 50 (Gotha, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 27 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 555.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Casati, <i>Ten Years in Equatoria</i> (London and New York, 1891), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 57, compare <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 134.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Wunenberger, “La Mission et le royaume de Humbé, sur les bords du Cunène,” <i>Les Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Torday and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. A.</abbr> Joyce, “Notes on the Ethnography of the Ba-Yaka,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48, 51.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Torday and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. A.</abbr> Joyce, “On the Ethnology of the South-Western Congo Free State,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Lenz, <i>Skizzen aus Westafrika</i> (Berlin, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 87.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Mansfeld, <i>Urwald-Dokumente, Vier Jahre unter den Crossflussnegern Kameruns</i> (Berlin, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 161.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Partridge, <i>Cross River Natives</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The care taken of the chief’s cut hair and nails is a precaution against the magical use that might be made of them by his enemies. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 375 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 114. “The chief collects to himself all medicines of known power; each doctor has his own special medicine or medicines, and treats some special form of disease, and the knowledge of such medicines is transmitted as a portion of the inheritance to the eldest son. When a chief hears that any doctor has proved successful in treating some case where others have failed, he calls him and demands the medicine, which is given up to him. Thus the chief becomes the great medicine-man of his tribe, and the ultimate reference is to him. If he fail, the case is given up as incurable” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i>Religious System of the Amazulu</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 419 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, note). The medicines here referred to are probably for the most part magical rather than medicinal in our sense of the term.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Grant, “Magato and his Tribe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 267.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Decle, <i>Three Years in Savage Africa</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 154.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Moffat, <i>Missionary Labours and Scenes in Southern Africa</i> (London, 1842), <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. A.</abbr> Maund, “Zambesia, the new British Possession in Central South Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, 1890, <abbr>p.</abbr> 651.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Croonenberghs, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. (1881) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 267 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p344" title="to page 344">344</a>, 345, 346.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Labat, <i>Relation historique de l’Éthiopie occidentale</i> (Paris, 1732), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 172⁠–⁠176.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Hecquard, <i>Reise an der Küste und in das Innere von West Afrika</i> (Leipzig, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 78.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i>Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 354, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 230.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Leighton Wilson, <i>Western Africa</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 62.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Kollmann, <i>The Victoria Nyanza</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 168.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr Livinhac, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, lx. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 110.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D’Unienville, <i>Statistique de l’Ile Maurice</i> (Paris, 1838) <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 285 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i>Tabou et Totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 118, quoting Leguével de Lacombe, <i>Voyage à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1840), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 229 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Probably the Antimoirona are identical with the Antimores.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Emin Pasha, quoted by <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i>Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 779 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholia on Apollonius Rhodius, <i>Argonautica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1248 καὶ Ἡρόδωρος ξένως περὶ τῶν δεσμῶν τοῦ Προμηθέως ταῦτα. εῖναι γὰρ αὐτὸν Σκυθῶν βασιλέα φησί· καί μὴ δυνάμενον παρέχειν τοῖς ὑπηκόοις τὰ ἐπιτήδεια, διὰ τὸν καλούμενον Ἀετὸν ποταμὸν ἐπικλύζειν τὰ πεδία, δεθῆναι ὑπὸ τῶν Σκυθῶν.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ammianus Marcellinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 5. 14.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Isis et Osiris</i>, 73.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 304 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Pfizmayer, “Nachrichten von den alten Bewohnern des heutigen Corea,” <i>Sitzungsberichte der philos.-histor. Classe der kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften</i> (Vienna), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lvii</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 483 <abbr>sq.</abbr> It would seem that the Chinese reported similarly of the Roman emperors. See Hirth, <i>China and the Roman Orient</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 41, 44, 52, 58, 70, 78.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. B.</abbr> Dennis, <i>Folklore of China</i> (London and Hongkong, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 125. An account of the <i>Peking Gazette</i>, the official publication of the Chinese government, may be read in <i>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, Nouvelle Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span> 95⁠–⁠182.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr Havard, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1834) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 470⁠–⁠473.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gio. Filippo de Marini, <i>Historia et relatione del Tunchino et del Giappone</i> (Rome, 1665), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 137 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Relation nouvelle et curieuse des royaumes de Tunquin et de Lao</i>, traduite de l’Italien du <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Mariny (<i>sic</i>) Romain (Paris, 1666), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 258 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i>The Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 146.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Geo. Catlin, <i>Manners, Customs, and Conditions of the North American Indians</i>⁴ (London, 1844), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 40 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. L.</abbr> Hardisty, “The Loucheux Indians,” <i>Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1866</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 312, 316.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Jetté, “On the Medicine-Men of the Ten’a,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 163. By the Ten’a the writer means the tribe which is variously known as the Tinneh, Déné, Dindjie, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, according to the taste and fancy of the speller.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Roland <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Dixon, “The Northern Maidu,” <i>Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (New York, 1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 267.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Roland <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Dixon, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 328, 331.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i>Tribes of California</i> (Washington, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 372 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Power, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 380 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> Thevet, <i>Les Singularitez de la France Antarctique, autrement nommée Amérique</i> (Antwerp, 1558), <abbr>p.</abbr> 65 [wrongly numbered 67].<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Phil. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Martius, <i>Zur Ethnographie Amerikas, zumal Brasiliens</i> (Leipzig, 1867), <abbr>p.</abbr> 76.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kurze, “Sitten und Gebräuche der Lengua-Indianer,” <i>Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (Jena, 1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19, 29.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Schomburgk, <i>Reisen in Britisch-Guiana</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 169 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 423, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 431; (Sir) Everard <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> im Thurn, <i>Among the Indians of Guiana</i> (London, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 211, 223 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 328, 333 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 339 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Blagden, <i>Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</i> (London, 1906), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 196 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 36.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maan, “Enige mededeelingen omtrent de zeden en gewoonten der Toerateya ten opzichte van de rijstbouw,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 339. The name Toorateya or “inlander” is only another form of Toradja.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Low, <i>Sarawak</i> (London, 1848), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 259 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 59.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Newbold, <i>Political and Statistical Account of the British Settlements in the Straits of Malacca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 193; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23⁠–⁠29.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. J.</abbr> Harrebomée, “Een ornamentenfeest van Gantarang (Zuid-Celebes),” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1875) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 344⁠–⁠351; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. K.</abbr> Niemann, “De Boegineezen en Makassaren,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. F.</abbr> van Braam Morris, in <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 215 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Paloppo naar Posso,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18, 25 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. W. C.</abbr> van den Berg, “De Mohammedaansche Vorsten in Nederlandsch-Indië,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72⁠–⁠80.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <i>Le Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte</i> (Paris 1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir William MacGregor, “Lagos, Abeokuta, and the Alake,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 12 (July, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 472.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Perregaux, <i>Chez les Achanti</i> (Neuchatel, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i>Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 76, 78, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i>Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</i> (Berlin, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 5⁠–⁠7. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Neumann, <i>Die Hellenen im Skythenlande</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Berlin, 1855) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 269 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 40. 11 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Wagner, <abbr>p.</abbr> 185. On public talismans in antiquity see Ch. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Lobeck, <i>Aglaophamus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; and my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 40. 11.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Laws of Manu</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 246 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bühler, <abbr>p.</abbr> 385 (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Homer, <i>Odyssey</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 409, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 43, 691, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 167, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 2, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 405; <i>Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 335, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> 464, <abbr>etc.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Homer, <i>Odyssey</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span> 109⁠–⁠114. The passage was pointed out to me by my friend <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridgeway. Naturally this view was not shared by the enlightened Greeks of a later age. See Sophocles, <i>Oedipus Tyrannus</i>, 31 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Polybius, Hist. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 6 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicolaus Damascenus, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> frag. 49, in <i>Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 381, Ἡν γὰρ δὴ κακίστος, καί ἄλλως βασιλεύοντος αὐτοῦ ηὔχμησεν ἡ γῆ.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 5. 1.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ammianus Marcellinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 5. 14.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Snorro Starleson, <i>Chronicle of the Kings of Norway</i> (translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Laing), saga <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> chs. 18, 47. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Liebrecht, <i>Zur Volkskunde</i> (Heilbronn, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 7; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Scheffer, <i>Upsalia</i> (Upsala, 1666), <abbr>p.</abbr> 137. In 1814 a pestilence broke out among the Chukchees of northeastern Siberia, which carried off many of the people and spread its ravages among the herds of reindeer. The shamans declared that the spirits were angry and would not stay the plague till the virtuous Kotchène, one of the most venerated chiefs, had been offered to them in sacrifice. No one was found hardy enough to raise a sacrilegious hand against him, and the shamans had to force the chief’s own son to cut his father’s throat. See De Wrangell, <i>Le Nord de la Sibérie</i> (Paris, 1843), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 265⁠–⁠267.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Saxo Grammaticus, <i>Historia Danica</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 779, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. E.</abbr> Müller.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. W.</abbr> Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 56 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; J. O’Donovan, <i>The Book of Rights</i> (Dublin, 1847), <abbr>p.</abbr> 8, note. Compare Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 492.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Johnson, <i>Journey to the Western Islands</i> (Baltimore, 1815), <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i>Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 5. As to the banner see also Th. Pennant, “Second Tour in Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 321 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i>The Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i> (Edinburgh, 1834), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Memoirs of John Evelyn, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></i>, New Edition (London, 1827), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 151 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, under July 6th, 1660. Angel gold were gold coins with the figure of an angel stamped on them. As to Charles’s triumphal entrance into London, see Evelyn, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 148 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Memoirs of Samuel Pepys, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></i>, edited by Lord Braybrook, Second Edition (London, 1828), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 187, compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 110, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 192.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. B.</abbr> Macaulay, <i>History of England</i>, chap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 478⁠–⁠481 (First Edition, London, 1855).<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Boswell, <i>Life of Samuel Johnson</i>, Ninth Edition (London, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 18 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Pettigrew, <i>Superstitions connected with the History and Practice of Medicine and Surgery</i> (London, 1844), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117⁠–⁠154; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Black, <i>Folk-Medicine</i> (London, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 140 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E. H.</abbr> Lecky, <i>History of England in the Eighteenth Century</i> (London, 1892), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 84⁠–⁠90. Down to the end of the eighteenth century it was believed in the Highlands of Scotland that some tribes of Macdonalds had the power of curing a certain disease by their touch and the use of a particular set of words. Hence the disease, which attacked the chest and lungs, was called “the Macdonald’s disease.” We are told that the faith of the people in the touch of a Macdonald was very great. See <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Th. Bisset, “Parish of Logierait,” in Sir John Sinclair’s <i>Statistical Account of Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Edinburgh, 1792) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baron Roger, “Notice sur le gouvernement, les mœurs et les superstitions du pays de Walo,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1827) <abbr>p.</abbr> 351.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mariner, <i>An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands</i>, Second Edition (London, 1818), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 434, note.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To this subject we shall recur later on. Meantime I may refer the reader to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 319 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 343; <i>Psyche’s Task</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A Roman name for jaundice was “the royal disease” (<i>morbus regius</i>). See Horace, <i>Ars poetica</i>, 453; Celsus, <i>De medicina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 24. Can this have been because the malady was believed to be caused and cured by kings? Did the sight or touch of the king’s red or purple robe ban the yellow tinge from the skin of the sufferer? As to such homoeopathic cures of jaundice, see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p079" title="to page 79">79</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Proyart’s “History of Loango, Kakongo, and other Kingdoms in Africa,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 573.<a href="chapter-1-6.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A reminiscence of this evolution is preserved in the Brahman theology, according to which the gods were at first mortal and dwelt on earth with men, but afterwards attained immortality and ascended to heaven by means of sacrifice. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Lévi, <i>La Doctrine du sacrifice dans les Brâhmanas</i> (Paris, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37⁠–⁠43, 59⁠–⁠61, 84 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p240" title="to page 240">240</a>⁠–⁠242.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <i>Religious Life and Thought in India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 268. However, as to the son of the carpenter it is said that “his followers scarcely worshipped him as a god, yet they fully believed in his power of working miracles.”<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i>Polynesian Researches</i>, Second Edition (London, 1832⁠–⁠36), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 372⁠–⁠5.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i>Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 35.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated August 26, 1898.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> Liefrinck, “Bijdrage tot de Kennis van het eiland Bali,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Mijne eerste ervaringen te Poso,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 399⁠–⁠403.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 38, 42, 44, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 29.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 4, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>.). On the deification of the sacrificer in the Brahman ritual see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Hubert and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Mauss, “Essai sur le sacrifice,” <i>L’Année sociologique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1897⁠–⁠1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Lévi, <i>La Doctrine du sacrifice dans les Brâhmanas</i> (Paris, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 102⁠–⁠108; Hubert and Mauss, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; <i>Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18⁠–⁠20, 25⁠–⁠35, 73, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See for examples <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i>Primitive Culture</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 131 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 24. 1. In 1902 the site of the temple was identified by means of inscriptions which mention the oracle. See <i>Berliner philologische Wochenschrift</i>, April 11, 1903, coll. 478 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 147. Pausanias (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 25. 13) mentions the draught of bull’s blood as an ordeal to test the chastity of the priestess. Doubtless it was thought to serve both purposes.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bishop <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Caldwell, “On Demonolatry in Southern India,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr> For a description of a similar rite performed at Periepatam in southern India see <i>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, Nouvelle Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 313 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In this latter case the performer was a woman, and the animal whose hot blood she drank was a pig.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 187.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, “De Minahasa in 1825,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 517 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare “De godsdienst en godsdienst-plegtigheden der Alfoeren in de Menhassa op het eiland Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift van Nederlandsch Indië</i>, 1849, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 395; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Graafland, <i>De Minahassa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 122; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dumont D’Urville, <i>Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de La Perouse</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 443.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Mone, <i>Geschichte des Heidenthums im nördlichen Europa</i> (Leipzig and Darmstadt, 1822⁠–⁠23), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 188.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Biddulph, <i>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i> (Calcutta, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 96. For other instances of priests or representatives of the deity drinking the warm blood of the victim, compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Oldfield, <i>Sketches from Nipal</i> (London, 1880), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 296 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Asiatic Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 40, 41, 50, 52 (8vo <abbr>ed.</abbr>); Paul Soleillet, <i>L’Afrique Occidentale</i> (Paris, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 <abbr>sq.</abbr> To snuff up the savour of the sacrifice was similarly supposed to produce inspiration (Tertullian, <i>Apologet.</i> 23).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Oldham, “The Nagas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society for 1901</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 463, 465 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 467, 470 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The Takhas worship the cobra, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Oldham believes them to be descended from the Nagas of the <i>Mahabharata</i>.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maimonides, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Chwolsohn, <i>Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1856), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 480 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Biddulph, <i>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 97.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i>Bis accus.</i> 1; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Tzetzes, <i>Scholia on Lycophron</i>, 6; Plutarch, <i>De E apud Delphos</i>, 2; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>De Pythiae oraculis</i>, 6.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 112.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lekkerkerker, “Enkele opmerkingen over sporen van Shamanisme bij Madoereezen en Javanen,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 282⁠–⁠284.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vambery, <i>Das Türkenvolk</i> (Leipzig, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 158.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>De defectu oraculorum</i> 46, 49, 51. The Greeks themselves seem commonly to have interpreted the shaking or nodding of the victim’s head as a token that the animal consented to be sacrificed. See Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones convivales</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 8. 7; Scholiast on Aristophanes, <i>Peace</i>, 960; Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius, <i>Argonautica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 425; and this explanation has been adopted by modern interpreters. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Willems, <i>Notes sur la Paix d’Aristophane</i> (Brussels, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30⁠–⁠33; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Monseur, in <i>Bulletin de Folklore</i>, 1903, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 216⁠–⁠229. But this interpretation can hardly be extended to the case of the Delphic victim which was expected to shake all over. The theory of possession applies equally to that and to the other cases, and is therefore preferable. The theory of consent may have been invented when the older view had ceased to be held and was forgotten.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Chwolsohn, <i>Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 37; <i>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 230 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. T.</abbr> Atkinson, <i>The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western Provinces of India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Allahabad, 1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 827; <i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 171, § 721; <i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 3, § 4; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 263; <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 161; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 103; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Mateer, <i>The Land of Charity</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 216; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Native Life in Travancore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. T.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 466, 469; Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Lyall, <i>Asiatic Studies</i>, First Series (London, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 19; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Biddulph, <i>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 131; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr> Pallas, <i>Reisen in verschiedenen Provinzen des russischen Reiches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 91; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vambery, <i>Das Türkenvolk</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 485; Erman, <i>Archiv für wissenschaftliche Kunde von Russland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 377; “Über die Religion der heidnischen Tscheremissen im Gouvernement Kasan,” <i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, N.F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1857) <abbr>p.</abbr> 153; <i>Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvii</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 366. When the Rao of Kachh sacrifices a buffalo, water is sprinkled between its horns; if it shakes its head, it is unsuitable; if it nods its head, it is sacrificed (<i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 120, § 911). This is probably a modern misinterpretation of the old custom.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir George Scott Robertson, <i>The Kafirs of the Hindu Kush</i> (London, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 423.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Moura, <i>Le Royaume du Cambodge</i> (Paris, 1883), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 177 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The practice in Tonquin is similar, except that there the person possessed seems only to give oracles. See <i>Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1830) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 331 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 32, 6. Coins of Magnesia exhibit on the reverse a man carrying an uprooted tree. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. B.</abbr> Baker, in <i>Numismatic Chronicle</i>, Third Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Baker suggests that the custom may be a relic of ancient tree-worship.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. S.</abbr> Stewart, <i>A Visit to the South Seas</i> (London, 1832), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 244 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Vincendon-Dumoulin et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Desgraz, <i>Îles Marquises ou Nouka-Hiva</i> (Paris, 1843), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 226, 240 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Mathias G⁠⸺, <i>Lettres sur les Îles Marquises</i> (Paris, 1843), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 44 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The general name applied to these human gods was <i>atuas</i>, which, “with scarce a modification, is the term used in all the Polynesian dialects to designate the ideal beings worshipped as gods, in the system of polytheism existing among the people. At the Washington Islands, as at other groups, the atuas, or false gods of the inhabitants, are numerous and vary in their character and powers. Besides those having dominion respectively, as is supposed, over the different elements and their most striking phenomena, there are atuas of the mountain and of the forest, of the seaside and of the interior, atuas of peace and of war, of the song and of the dance, and of all the occupations and amusements of life. It is supposed by them that many of the departed spirits of men also become atuas: and thus the multiplicity of their gods is such, that almost every sound in nature, from the roaring of the tempest in the mountains and the bursting of a thunderbolt in the clouds, to the sighing of a breeze through the coconut tops and the chirping of an insect in the grass or in the thatch of their huts, is interpreted into the movements of a god” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. S.</abbr> Stewart, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 243 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). The missionary referred to in the text, who described one of the human gods from personal observation, was the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crooke of the London Missionary Society, who resided in the island of Tahuata in 1797. On the deification of living men see Lord Avebury (Sir John Lubbock), <i>Origin of Civilisation</i>⁴ (London, 1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 354 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Moerenhout, <i>Voyages aux Îles du Grand Océan</i> (Paris, 1837), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 479; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i>Polynesian Researches</i>, Second Edition (London, 1832⁠–⁠1836), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 94.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Tyerman and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bennet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of Voyages and Travels in the South Sea Islands, China, India, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i> (London, 1831), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 524; compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 529 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tyerman and Bennet, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 529 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i>Polynesian Researches</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 108. The Ethnological Museum at Berlin possesses a magnificent robe of red and yellow feathers with a feather helmet, also two very handsome tippets of the same materials. They were the insignia of the royal family of Hawaii, and might be worn by no one else.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Williams, <i>Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands</i> (London, 1838), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 471 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 113 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Missionary Chevron, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1843) <abbr>p.</abbr> 37. Compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1841) <abbr>p.</abbr> 378.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37, 48, 57, 58, 59, 73.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hazlewood, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Erskine’s <i>Cruise among the Islands of the Western Pacific</i> (London, 1853), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 246 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Ch. Wilkes, <i>Narrative of the U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Exploring Expedition</i>, New Edition (New York, 1851), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 87; Th. Williams, <i>Fiji and the Fijians</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 219 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122. “A great chief [in Fiji] really believed himself to be a god⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> a reincarnation of an ancestor who had grown into a god” (<abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated August 26, 1898).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kubary, “Die Religion der Pelauer,” in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian’s <i>Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</i> (Berlin, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 30 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Porphyry, <i>De abstinentia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 9; Eusebius, <i>Praeparatio Evangelii</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 12; compare Minucius Felix, <i>Octavius</i>, 29. The titles of the nomarchs or provincial governors of Egypt seem to show that they were all originally worshipped as gods by their subjects (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i>Die Religion der alten Ägypter</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 93; <abbr>id.</abbr> “Menschenvergötterung im alten Ägypten,” <i>Am Urquell</i>, N.F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 290 <abbr>sq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diogenes Laertius, <i>Vitae Philosophorum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 59⁠–⁠62; <i>Fragmenta philosophorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. G. A.</abbr> Mullach, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12, 14; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Diels, <i>Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 205. I owe this and the following case of a human god to a lecture on Greek religion by my friend Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Diels, which I was privileged to hear at Berlin in December 1902.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Demetrius</i>, 10⁠–⁠13; Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 62 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 253 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Apparently the giddy young man submitted to deification with a better grace than his rough old father Antigonus; who, when a poet called him a god and a child of the sun, bluntly remarked, “That’s not my valet’s opinion of me.” See Plutarch, <i>Isis et Osiris</i>, 24. For more evidence of the deification of living men among the Greeks see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Cook, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Germania</i>, 8; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Historiae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 61; Clement of Alexandria, <i>Stromateis</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 15. 72, <abbr>p.</abbr> 360, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Potter; Caesar, <i>Bellum Gallicum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 50.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Germania</i>, 8; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Historiae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 61, 65, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 22. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Müllenhoff, <i>Deutsche Altertumskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 208 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3, 5, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dos Santos, “Eastern Ethiopia,” in G. M’Call Theal’s <i>Records of South-Eastern Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 190 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 199.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dos Santos, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 295.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Arnot, <i>Garengauze; or, Seven Years’ Pioneer Mission Work in Central Africa</i> (London, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.D.</abbr>, preface, dated March 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 78.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1856) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 273 <abbr>sq.</abbr> This is from a German abstract (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 257⁠–⁠313, 369⁠–⁠420) of a work, which embodies the results of a Portuguese expedition conducted by Major Monteiro in 1831 and 1832. The territory of the Maraves is described as bounded on the south by the Zambesi and on the east by the Portuguese possessions. Probably things have changed greatly in the seventy years which have elapsed since the expedition.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. W. H.</abbr> Knight-Bruce, <i>Memories of Mashonaland</i> (London and New York, 1895), <abbr>p.</abbr> 43; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, 1890, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 346 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Croonenberghs, “La Mission du Zambèze,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1882) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 452 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Norris Newman, <i>Matabeleland and how we got it</i> (London, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 167 <abbr>sq.</abbr> These particulars were communicated to Captain Newman by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Thomas, son of the first missionary to Matabeleland.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lii</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 443⁠–⁠445. Compare Father Croonenberghs, “La Mission du Zambèze,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 452.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. W.</abbr> Felkin, “Notes on the Waganda Tribe of Central Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1885⁠–⁠86) <abbr>p.</abbr> 762; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. T.</abbr> Wilson and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. W.</abbr> Felkin, <i>Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 206; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i>Religion and Myth</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V. L.</abbr> Cameron, <i>Across Africa</i> (London, 1877), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 69.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr. Massaja, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1858) <abbr>p.</abbr> 51.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The Strange Adventures of Andrew Battel,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 330; Proyart, “History of Loango, Kakongo, and other Kingdoms in Africa,” in Pinkerton, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 577; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i>Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 335.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ogilby, <i>Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 615; Dapper, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 400.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Adams, <i>Sketches taken during ten Voyages to Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Remarks on the Country extending from Cape Palmas to the River Congo</i> (London, 1823), <abbr>p.</abbr> 111. Compare “My Wanderings in Africa,” by an F.R.G.S. [<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Burton], <i>Fraser’s Magazine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvii</span>. (April 1863) <abbr>p.</abbr> 414.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Allen and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. R. H.</abbr> Thomson, <i>Narrative of the Expedition to the River Niger in 1841</i> (London, 1848), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 288. A slight mental confusion may perhaps be detected in this utterance of the dark-skinned deity. But such confusion, or rather obscurity, is almost inseparable from any attempt to define with philosophic precision the profound mystery of incarnation.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i>Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 419.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, “Curiosities of Words connected with Royalty and Chieftainship,” <i>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 302; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 218.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, in <i>Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 307; <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 225.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Noel, “Île de Madagascar: recherches sur les Sakkalava,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Deuxième Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1843) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Newbold, <i>Political and Statistical Account of the British Settlement in the Straits of Malacca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 193. See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#p362" title="to page 362">362</a>⁠–⁠364.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 29.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. K. N[iemann], “Bijdrage tot de Kennis van den Godsdienst der Bataks,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1870) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 289 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Hagen, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Battareligion,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 537 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, “Het animisme,” <i>De Indische Gids</i>, July 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i> (Leyden, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 369 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 612; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Freiherr von Brenner, <i>Besuch bei den Kannibalen Sumatras</i> (Würzburg, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 340.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Marsden, <i>History of Sumatra</i> (London, 1811), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 376 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Paloppo naar Posso,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 22.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Valentyn, <i>Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 7 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Boot, “Korte schets der noordkust van Ceram,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1198 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sangermano, <i>Description of the Burmese Empire</i> (reprinted at Rangoon, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i>Le Cambodge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Paris, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 25.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young, <i>The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Similarly, special sets of terms are or have been used with reference to persons of royal blood in Burma (Forbes, <i>British Burma</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 71 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Shway Yoe, <i>The Burman</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 118 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>), Cambodia (Lemire, <i>Cochinchine française et le royaume de Cambodge</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 447), the Malay Peninsula (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35), Travancore (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Mateer, <i>Native Life in Travancore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 129), the Pelew Islands (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Semper, <i>Die Palau-Inseln</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 <abbr>sq.</abbr>), Ponape, one of the Caroline Islands (<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hahl, “Mitteilungen über Sitten und rechtliche Verhältnisse auf Ponape,” <i>Ethnologisches Notizblatt</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 5), Samoa (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Th. Violette, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1870) <abbr>p.</abbr> 190; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Newell, “Chief’s Language in Samoa,” <i>Transactions of the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists</i>, London, 1893, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 784⁠–⁠799), the Maldives (<abbr>Fr.</abbr> Pyrard, <i>Voyage to the East Indies, the Maldives, the Moluccas, and Brazil</i>, Hakluyt Society, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 226), in some parts of Madagascar (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, in <i>The Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>., Christmas 1887, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 310 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 215 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>), among the Bawenda of the Transvaal (Beuster, “Das Volk der Vawenda,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 238), and among the Natchez Indians of North America (Du Pratz, <i>History of Louisiana</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 328). When we remember that special vocabularies of this sort have been employed with regard to kings or chiefs who are known to have enjoyed a divine or semi-divine character, as in Tahiti (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p388" title="to page 388">388</a>), Fiji (Th. Williams, <i>Fiji and the Fijians</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 37), and Tonga (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mariner, <i>Tonga Islands</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 79), we shall be inclined to surmise that the existence of such a practice anywhere is indicative of a tendency to deify royal personages, who are thus marked off from their fellows. This would not necessarily apply to a custom of using a special dialect or particular forms of speech in addressing social superiors generally, such as prevails in Java (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. S.</abbr> Raffles, <i>History of Java</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 310, 366 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, London, 1817), and Bali (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Friederich, “Voorloopig Verslag van het eiland Bali,” <i>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span> 4; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Jacobs, <i>Eenigen tijd onder de Baliërs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 383.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. I.</abbr> Curtiss, <i>Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i> (Chicago, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 102.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Marshall, <i>Travels amongst the Todas</i> (London, 1873), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 136, 137; cp. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141, 142; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Metz, <i>Tribes inhabiting the Neilgherry Hills</i>, Second Edition (Mangalore, 1864), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> However, at the present day, according to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, the <i>palol</i> or milkman of the highest class is rather a sacred priest than a god. But there is a tradition that the gods held the office of milkman, and even now the human milkman of one particular dairy is believed to be the direct successor of a god. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i>The Todas</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 448 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <i>Religious Life and Thought in India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 259.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Laws of Manu</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 8, <abbr>p.</abbr> 217, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bühler (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 317, 319, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 398, 399.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 341 (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>.).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 457.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 259 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have borrowed the description of this particular deity from the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. M.</abbr> Fairbairn, who knew him personally (<i>Contemporary Review</i>, June 1899, <abbr>p.</abbr> 768). It is melancholy to reflect that in our less liberal land the divine Swami would probably have been consigned to the calm seclusion of a gaol or a madhouse. The difference between a god and a madman or a criminal is often merely a question of latitude and longitude.</p>
					<p>Swami departed this life in August 1899 at the age of about seventy. It is only fair to his memory to add that the writer who records his death bears high and honourable testimony to the noble and unselfish character of the deceased, who is said to have honestly repudiated the miraculous powers ascribed to him by his followers. He was worshipped in temples during his life, and other temples have been erected to him since his death. See Rai Bahadur Lala Baij Nath, B.A., <i>Hinduism Ancient and Modern</i> (Meerut, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 236, 280.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i> (Madras, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 301.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Edward Moor, “Account of an Hereditary Living Deity,” <i>Asiatic Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (London, 1803) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 381⁠–⁠395; Viscount Valentia, <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 151⁠–⁠159; Ch. Coleman, <i>Mythology of the Hindus</i> (London, 1832), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 106⁠–⁠111; <i>Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Bombay, 1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125 <abbr>sq.</abbr> I have to thank my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke for calling my attention to the second and fourth of these works. To be exact, I should say that I have no information as to this particular deity later than the account given of him in the eighteenth volume of the Bombay Gazetteer, published some twenty-five years ago. But I think we may assume that the same providential reasons which prolonged the revelation down to the publication of the Gazetteer have continued it to the present time.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 136 <abbr>sq.</abbr> A full account of the doctrines and practices of the sect may be found in the <i>History of the Sect of the Maharajas or Vallabhacharyas</i>, published by Trübner at London in 1865. My attention was directed to it by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Harnack, <i>Lehrbuch der Dogmengeschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 321.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. C.</abbr> Conybeare, “The History of Christmas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">American Journal of Theology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Conybeare kindly lent me a proof of this article, and the statement in the text is based on it. In the published article the author has made some changes.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Mackenzie Wallace, <i>Russia</i> (London, Paris, and New York, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.D.</abbr>), <abbr>p.</abbr> 302. The passage in the text is “a short extract from a description of the ‘Khlysti’ by one who was initiated into their mysteries.” As to these Russian Christs see further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Tsakni, <i>La Russie sectaire</i> (Paris, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.D.</abbr>), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Amongst the means which these sectaries take to produce a state of religious exaltation are wild, whirling dances like those of the dancing Dervishes.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Mosheim, <i>Ecclesiastical History</i> (London, 1819), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 278 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Mosheim, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 288 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr. Flaget, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1834) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84. Mgr. Flaget was bishop of Bardstown, and his letter is dated May 4, 1833. He says that the events happened in a neighbouring state about three years before he wrote.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. C. J.</abbr> Ibbetson, <i>Outlines of Panjab Ethnography</i> (Calcutta, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 123.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Massaja, <i>I miei trentacinque anni di missione nell’ alta Etiopia</i> (Rome and Milan, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 53 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Father Leon des Avanchers, in <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Vme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i>Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Voyage dans le Laos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Paris, 1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 47.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robinson, <i>Descriptive Account of Assam</i> (London and Calcutta, 1841), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 342 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i>Asiatic Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 146.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Huc, <i>Souvenirs d’un voyage dans la Tartarie et le Thibet</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 279 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 12mo. For more details, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. A.</abbr> Waddell, <i>The Buddhism of Tibet</i> (London, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 245 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Timkowski, <i>Travels of the Russian Mission through Mongolia to China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 23⁠–⁠25; Abbé Armand David, “Voyage en Mongolie,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), VIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1875) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 132⁠–⁠134; Mgr Bruguière, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1836) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 296 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Father Gabet, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1848) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229⁠–⁠231; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Sandberg, <i>Tibet and the Tibetans</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> In the Delta of the Niger the souls of little negro babies are identified by means of a similar test. An assortment of small wares that belonged to deceased members of the family is shown to the new baby, and the first thing he grabs at identifies him. “Why, he’s uncle John,” they say; “see! he knows his own pipe.” Or, “That’s cousin Emma; see! she knows her market calabash” (Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. H.</abbr> Kingsley, <i>Travels in West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 493).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Huc, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 279, 347 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Meiners, <i>Geschichte der Religionen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 335 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Georgi, <i>Beschreibung aller Nationen des russischen Reichs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 415; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i>Travels in Siberia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 303 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Geographic Society</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168, 169; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Geographic Society</i> N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 67; Sarat Chandra Das, <i>Journey to Lhasa and Central Tibet</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The Grand Lama’s palace is called Potala. Views of it from a photograph and from a drawing are given by Sarat Chandra Das. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>, the Lama in question is called the Lama Gûrû; but the context shows that he is the great Lama of Lhasa.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thevenot, <i>Relations des divers voyages</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. Partie (Paris, 1672), “Voyage à la Chine des <abbr>PP.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Grueber et d’Orville,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 22.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Pander (professor at the University of Peking), “Das lamaische Pantheon,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 76; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Geschichte des Lamaismus,” <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> (202).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr Danicourt, “Rapport sur l’origine, les progrès et la décadence de la secte des <i>Tao-sse</i>, en Chine,” <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1858) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15⁠–⁠20; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Gray, <i>China</i> (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 103 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Merz, “Bericht über seine erste Reise von Amoy nach Kui-kiang,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 413⁠–⁠416.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Garcilasso de la Vega, <i>First Part of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> chs. 8 and 15 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131, 155, Markham’s translation). This writer tells us that the Peruvian Indians “held their kings not only to be possessed of royal majesty, but to be gods” (<abbr>ibid.</abbr> bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 303, Markham’s Trans.). <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Payne denies that the Incas believed in their descent from the sun, and stigmatises as a ridiculous fable the notion that they were worshipped as gods (<i>History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 506, 512). I content myself with reproducing the statements of Garcilasso de la Vega, who had ample means of ascertaining the truth. His good faith has been questioned, but, as I believe, on insufficient grounds. See below, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 244 note¹.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexander von Humboldt, <i>Researches concerning the Institutions and Monuments of the Ancient Inhabitants of America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 106 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ternaux-Compans, <i>Essai sur l’ancien Cundinamarca</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 14 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 19 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 40 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Th. Waitz, <i>Anthropologie der Naturvölker</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 352 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Müller, <i>Geschichte der amerikanischen Urreligionen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 430 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Ph. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Martius, <i>Zur Ethnographie Amerikas</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 455; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i>Die Culturländer des alten Amerika</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 204 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#p356" title="to page 356">356</a>.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i>Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 146.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Manuscrit Ramirez: Histoire de l’origine des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, publié par <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Charnay (Paris, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 107; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> de Acosta, <i>Natural and Moral History of the Indies</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 505, 508 (Hakluyt Society, London, 1880).<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i>Sectarianism and Religious Persecution in China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Amsterdam, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Manners and Customs of the Japanese in the Nineteenth Century</i>: from recent Dutch visitors to Japan and the German of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ph. <abbr>Fr.</abbr> von Siebold (London, 1841), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Radau, <i>Early Babylonian History</i> (New York and London, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 307⁠–⁠317. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Brockelmann, “Wesen und Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,” <i>Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 394; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Zimmern, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Schrader’s <i>Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</i>³ (Berlin, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 379, 639 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ammianus Marcellinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span> 6, §§ 5 and 6.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. P.</abbr> Tiele, <i>History of the Egyptian Religion</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 103 <abbr>sq.</abbr> On the worship of the kings see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meyer, <i>Geschichte des Altertums</i>,² <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 2. § 219, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i>Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Die ägyptische Religion</i> (Berlin, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 39 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> von Strauss und Carnen, <i>Die altägyptischen Götter und Göttersagen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 467 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i>Die Religion der alten Ägypter</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Menschenvergötterung im alten Ägypten,” <i>Am Urquelle</i>, N.F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 289 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i>Herodots zweites Buch</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 274 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i>Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique: les origines</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 258⁠–⁠267; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Naville, <i>La Religion des anciens Égyptiens</i> (Paris, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 225 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Diodorus Siculus observed (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 90) that “the Egyptians seem to worship and honour their kings as very gods.”<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Renouf, “The priestly Character of the earliest Egyptian Civilisation,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 355.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <i>Du caractère religieux de la royauté pharaonique</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 313.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 299.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 233.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> von Strauss und Carnen, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 470. On the titles of the Egyptian kings see further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17⁠–⁠38.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. P.</abbr> Tiele, <i>History of the Egyptian Religion</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 105. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 71 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 312.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In regard to the natives of the western islands of Torres Straits it has been remarked by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon that the magicians or sorcerers “constituted the only professional class among these democratic islanders” (<i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 321). The same observation could be applied to many other savage tribes.<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For example, amongst the Todas the medicine-man has been differentiated from the sorcerer; yet their common origin is indicated by their both using the same kind of magical formulas or spells to accomplish their different ends. See <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i>The Todas</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 271: “It seems clear that the Todas have advanced beyond the stage of human culture in which all misfortunes are produced by magic. They recognise that some ills are not due to human intervention, but yet they employ the same kind of means to remove these ills as are employed to remove those brought about by human agency. The advance of the Todas is shown most clearly by the differentiation of function between <i>pilikòren</i> and <i>utkòren</i>, between sorcerers and medicine-men, and we seem to have here a clear indication of the differentiation between magic and medicine. The two callings are followed by different men, who are entirely distinct from one another, but both use the same kind of formula to bring about the effect they desire to produce.”<a href="chapter-1-7.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 220 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> of the first collected edition of Hegel’s works, Berlin, 1832). The coincidence was also pointed out to me by my friend <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M. E.</abbr> McTaggart.<a href="appendix-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Similarly I have pointed out elsewhere (<i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 169 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) that it is the unstable, apparently irregular, incalculable element in nature which the magician particularly aims at controlling, while so far as the course of nature is observed to be stable, regular, and uniform it lies comparatively outside the operations of magic. “To put it generally, the practice of magic for the control of nature will be found on the whole to increase with the variability and to decrease with the uniformity of nature throughout the year. Hence the increase will tend to become more and more conspicuous as we recede from the equator, where the annual changes of natural conditions are much less marked than elsewhere. This general rule is no doubt subject to many exceptions which depend on local varieties of climate.⁠ ⁠… But, on the whole, this department of magic, if not checked by civilisation or other causes, would naturally attain its highest vogue in the temperate and polar zones rather than in the equatorial regions; while, on the other hand, the branch of magical art which deals directly with mankind, aiming for example at the cure or infliction of disease, tends for obvious reasons to be diffused equally over the globe without distinction of latitude or climate” (<i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 170). The reason why the latter branch of magic tends to be equally prevalent in all parts of the world is, of course, that in all parts of the world human nature is equally unstable, seemingly irregular, and incalculable by comparison with the stability, regularity, and uniformity of nature.<a href="appendix-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have not found the passage of Captain Parry which Hegel here quotes, whether from the English original or from a German translation. I should doubt whether the gallant English explorer would have spoken of an “empirical mode of existence,” which appears to me to savour rather of the professor’s lecture-room than of the captain’s quarterdeck.<a href="appendix-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1-1-1449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. W. F.</abbr> Hegel, <i>Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion</i>, translated by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Spiers, B. D., and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Burdon Sanderson, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (London, 1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 290⁠–⁠298. Further, Hegel observes (<abbr>p.</abbr> 300) that “magic has existed among all peoples and at every period.”<a href="appendix-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1-1449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
