<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3-12" epub:type="chapter">
			<div class="tei tei-div" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 6.00em">
				<div class="tei tei-div" id="footnotes" style="margin-bottom: 5.00em; margin-top: 5.00em">
					<a id="toc67" name="toc67"/>
					<a id="pdf68" name="pdf68"/>
					<h1 class="tei tei-head" style="text-align: left; margin-bottom: 3.46em; margin-top: 3.46em">
						<span style="font-size: 173%">Footnotes</span>
					</h1>
					<dl class="tei tei-list-footnotes">
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_1" id="note_1" name="note_1">1.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For examples see M. Dobrizhoffer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia de Abiponibus</span></span> (Vienna, 1784), ii. 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 240 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; C. Gay, <span class="tei tei-q">“Fragment d'un voyage dans le Chili et au Cusco,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin le la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), Deuxième Série, xix. (1843) p. 25; H. Delaporte, <span class="tei tei-q">“Une Visite chez les Araucaniens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), Quatrième Série, x. (1855) p. 30; K. von den Steinen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 344, 348; E. F. im Thurn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among the Indians of Guiana</span></span> (London, 1883), pp. 330 sq.; A. G. Morice, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Canadian Dénés,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annual Archaeological Report, 1905</span></span>; (Toronto, 1906), p. 207; (Sir) George Grey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery into North-West and Western Australia</span></span> (London, 1841), ii. 238; A. Oldfield, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Aborigines of Australia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</span></span>, N.S. iii. (1865) p. 236; J. Dawson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Australian Aborigines</span></span> (Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide, 1881), p. 63; Rev. G. Taplin, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Narrinyeri,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South Australia</span></span> (Adelaide, 1879), p. 25; C. W. Schürmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Aboriginal Tribes of Port Lincoln,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South Australia</span></span>, p. 237; H. E. A. Meyer, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South Australia</span></span>, p. 195; R. Brough Smyth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Aborigines of Victoria</span></span> (Melbourne, 1878), i. 110, ii. 289 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Stanbridge, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</span></span>, New Series, i. (1861) p. 299; L. Fison and A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</span></span>, pp. 250 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. L. P. Cameron, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Tribes of New South Wales,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiv. (1885) pp. 361, 362 sq.; W. Ridley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kamilaroi</span></span>, Second Edition (Sydney, 1875), p. 159; Baldwin Spencer and F. J. Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 46-48; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</span></span>, v. (Cambridge, 1904) pp. 248, 323; E. Beardmore, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Natives of Mowat, British New Guinea,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xix. (1890) p. 461; R. E. Guise, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Tribes inhabiting the Mouth of the Wanigela River, New Guinea,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxviii. (1899) p. 216; C. G. Seligmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Melanesians of British New Guinea</span></span> (Cambridge, 1910), p. 279; K. Vetter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Komm herüber und hilf uns! oder die Arbeit der Neuen-Dettelsauer Mission</span></span>, iii. (Barmen, 1898) pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nachrichten über Kaiser-Wilhelmsland und den Bismarck-Archipel</span></span>, 1897, pp. 94, 98; A. Deniau, <span class="tei tei-q">“Croyances religieuses et mœurs des indigènes de l'ile Malo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xxxiii. (1901) pp. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. Ribbe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zwei Jahre unter den Kannibalen der Salomo-Inseln</span></span> (Dresden-Blasewitz, 1903), p. 268; P. A. Kleintitschen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</span></span> (Hiltrup bei Münster, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 344; P. Rascher, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Sulka,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Anthropologie</span></span>, xxix. (1904) pp. 221 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. Parkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1907), pp. 199-201; G. Brown, D.D., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Melanesians and Polynesians</span></span> (London, 1910), p. 176; Father Abinal, <span class="tei tei-q">“Astrologie Malgache,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xi. (1879) p. 506; A. Grandidier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Madagascar,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), Sixième Série, iii. (1872) p. 399; Father Campana, <span class="tei tei-q">“Congo, Mission Catholique de Landana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xxvii. (1895) pp. 102 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Th. Masui, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Guide de la Section de l'État Indépendant du Congo à l'Exposition de Bruxelles-Tervueren en 1897</span></span> (Brussels, 1897), p. 82. The discussion of this and similar evidence must be reserved for another work.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_2" id="note_2" name="note_2">2.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Meiners, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religionen</span></span> (Hannover, 1806-1807), i. 48.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_3" id="note_3" name="note_3">3.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. I. Dodge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Our Wild Indians</span></span>, p. 112.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_4" id="note_4" name="note_4">4.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Blumentritt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Ahnencultus und die religiösen Anschauungen der Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen d. Wiener geogr. Gesellschaft</span></span>, 1882, p. 198.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_5" id="note_5" name="note_5">5.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir James E. Alexander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Expedition of Discovery into the Interior of Africa</span></span>, i. 166; H. Lichtenstein, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen im Südlichen Africa</span></span> (Berlin, 1811-1812), i. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. H. I. Bleek, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reynard the Fox in South Africa</span></span> (London, 1864), pp. 75 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Theophilus Hahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tsuni-Goam, the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</span></span> (London, 1881), pp. 56, 69.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_6" id="note_6" name="note_6">6.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Callimachus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hymn to Zeus</span></span>, 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, iii. 61; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Philopseudes</span></span>, 3; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jupiter Tragoedus</span></span>, 45; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Philopatris</span></span>, 10; Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vita Pythagorae</span></span>, 17; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura deorum</span></span>, iii. 21. 53; Pomponius Mela, ii. 7. 112; Minucius Felix, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Octavius</span></span>, 21; Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. instit.</span></span> i. II.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_7" id="note_7" name="note_7">7.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isis et Osiris</span></span>, 35; Philochorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragm.</span></span> 22, in C. Müller's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, i. p. 378; Tatian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Oratio ad Graecos</span></span>, 8, ed. Otto; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 208. Compare Ch. Petersen, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Grab und die Todtenfeier des Dionysos,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Philologus</span></span>, xv. (1860) pp. 77-91. The grave of Dionysus is also said to have been at Thebes (Clemens Romanus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Recognitiones</span></span>, x. 24; Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Graeca</span></span>, i. col. 1434).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_8" id="note_8" name="note_8">8.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vit. Pythag.</span></span> 16.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_9" id="note_9" name="note_9">9.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philochorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fr.</span></span> 184, in C. Müller's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ii. p. 414.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_10" id="note_10" name="note_10">10.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Lobeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aglaophamus</span></span> (Königsberg, 1829), pp. 574 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_11" id="note_11" name="note_11">11.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient classique: les origines</span></span>, pp. 108-111, 116-118. On the mortality of the Egyptian gods see further A. Moret, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte</span></span> (Paris, 1902), pp. 219 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_12" id="note_12" name="note_12">12.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isis et Osiris</span></span>, 21, 22, 38, 61; Diodorus Siculus, i. 27. 4; Dittenberger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orientis Graeci inscriptiones selectae</span></span>, i. No. 56, p. 102.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_13" id="note_13" name="note_13">13.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion der alten Aegypter</span></span>, pp. 59 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. Maspero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire ancienne des peuples de l'Orient classique: les origines</span></span>, pp. 104-108, 150. Indeed it was an article of the Egyptian creed that every god must die after he had begotten a son in his own likeness (A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Herodots zweites Buch</span></span>, p. 204). Hence the Egyptian deities were commonly arranged in trinities of a simple and natural type, each comprising a father, a mother, and a son. <span class="tei tei-q">“Speaking generally, two members of such a triad were gods, one old and one young, and the third was a goddess, who was, naturally, the wife, or female counterpart, of the older god. The younger god was the son of the older god and goddess, and he was supposed to possess all the attributes and powers which belonged to his father.... The feminine counterpart or wife of the chief god was usually a local goddess of little or no importance; on the other hand, her son by the chief god was nearly as important as his father, because it was assumed that he would succeed to his rank and throne when the elder god had passed away. The conception of the triad or trinity is, in Egypt, probably as old as the belief in gods, and it seems to be based on the anthropomorphic views which were current in the earliest times about them”</span> (E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span>, London, 1904, i. 113 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). If the Christian doctrine of the Trinity took shape under Egyptian influence, the function originally assigned to the Holy Spirit may have been that of the divine mother. In the apocryphal <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Gospel to the Hebrews</span></span>, as Mr. F. C. Conybeare was kind enough to point out to me, Christ spoke of the Holy Ghost as his mother. The passage is quoted by Origen (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Comment. in Joan. II.</span></span> vol. iv. col. 132, ed. Migne), and runs as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“My mother the Holy Spirit took me a moment ago by one of my hairs and carried me away to the great Mount Tabor.”</span> Compare Origen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Jeremiam Hom.</span></span> XV. 4, vol. iii. col. 433, ed. Migne. In the reign of Trajan a certain Alcibiades, from Apamea in Syria, appeared at Rome with a volume in which the Holy Ghost was described as a stalwart female about ninety-six miles high and broad in proportion. See Hippolytus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Refut. omnium haeresium</span></span>, ix. 13, p. 462, ed. Duncker and Schneidewin. The Ophites represented the Holy Spirit as <span class="tei tei-q">“the first woman,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“mother of all living,”</span> who was beloved by <span class="tei tei-q">“the first man”</span> and likewise by <span class="tei tei-q">“the second man,”</span> and who conceived by one or both of them <span class="tei tei-q">“the light, which they call Christ.”</span> See H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Weihnachtsfest</span></span>, pp. 116 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, quoting Irenaeus, i. 28. As to a female member of the Trinity, see further <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dreiheit, ein Versuch mythologischer Zahlenlehre</span></span> (Bonn, 1903), pp. 41 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Gibbon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire</span></span>, ch. 1. vol. ix. p. 261, note g (Edinburgh, 1811). Mr. Conybeare tells me that Philo Judaeus, who lived in the first half of the first century of our era, constantly defines God as a Trinity in Unity, or a Unity in Trinity, and that the speculations of this Alexandrian Jew deeply influenced the course of Christian thought on the mystical nature of the deity. Thus it seems not impossible that the ancient Egyptian doctrine of the divine Trinity may have been distilled through Philo into Christianity. On the other hand it has been suggested that the Christian Trinity is of Babylonian origin. See H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 418 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 440.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_14" id="note_14" name="note_14">14.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian Religion and Mythology</span></span> (London, 1899), p. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_15" id="note_15" name="note_15">15.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De defectu oraculorum</span></span>, 17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_16" id="note_16" name="note_16">16.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is in substance the explanation briefly suggested by F. Liebrecht, and developed more fully and with certain variations of detail by S. Reinach. See F. Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Des Gervasius von Tilbury Otia Imperialia</span></span> (Hanover, 1856), p. 180; S. Reinach, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cultes, mythes et religions</span></span>, iii. (Paris, 1908), pp. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As to the worship of Tammuz or Adonis in Syria and Greece see my <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition (London, 1907). In Plutarch's narrative confusion seems to have arisen through the native name (Tammuz) of the deity, which either accidentally coincided with that of the pilot (as S. Reinach thinks) or was erroneously transferred to him by a narrator (as F. Liebrecht supposed). An entirely different explanation of the story has been proposed by Dr. W. H. Roscher. He holds that the god whose death was lamented was the great ram-god of Mendes in Egypt, whom Greek writers constantly mistook for a goat-god and identified with Pan. A living ram was always revered as an incarnation of the god, and when it died there was a great mourning throughout all the land of Mendes. Some stone coffins of the sacred animal have been found in the ruins of the city. See Herodotus, ii. 46, with A. Wiedemann's commentary; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Legende vom Tode des groszen Pan,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fleckeisen's Jahrbücher für classische Philologie</span></span>, xxxviii. (1892) pp. 465-477. Dr. Roscher shews that Thamus was an Egyptian name, comparing Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Phaedrus</span></span>, p. 274 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d e</span></span>; Polyaenus, iii. 2. 5; Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vit. Apollon. Tyan.</span></span> vi. 5. 108. As to the worshipful goat, or rather ram, of Mendes, see also Diodorus Siculus, i. 84; Strabo, xvii. 1. 19, p. 802; Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 39, p. 34, ed. Potter; Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Μένδην.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_17" id="note_17" name="note_17">17.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Liebrecht, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 412, 414. The latter writer observes with justice that <span class="tei tei-q">“the wailing for 'Uncūd, the divine Grape-cluster, seems to be the last survival of an old vintage piaculum.”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“The dread of the worshippers,”</span> he adds, <span class="tei tei-q">“that the neglect of the usual ritual would be followed by disaster, is particularly intelligible if they regarded the necessary operations of agriculture as involving the violent extinction of a particle of divine life.”</span> On the mortality of the gods in general and of the Teutonic gods in particular, see J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 263 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; compare E. H. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythologie der Germanen</span></span> (Strasburg, 1903), p. 288. As to the mortality of the Irish gods, see Douglas Hyde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Literary History of Ireland</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_18" id="note_18" name="note_18">18.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Der Muata Cazembe und die Völkerstämme der Maravis, Chevas, Muembas, Lundas und andere von Süd-Afrika,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</span></span>, vi. (1856) p. 395; F. T. Valdez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Six Years of a Traveller's Life in Western Africa</span></span> (London, 1861), ii. 241 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_19" id="note_19" name="note_19">19.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 6, 7 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_20" id="note_20" name="note_20">20.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 26 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_21" id="note_21" name="note_21">21.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. W. Gill, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</span></span> (London, 1876), p. 163.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_22" id="note_22" name="note_22">22.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. A. Junod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Ba-Ronga</span></span> (Neuchatel, 1898), pp. 381 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_23" id="note_23" name="note_23">23.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Barbrooke Grubb, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Unknown People in an Unknown Land</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 120.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_24" id="note_24" name="note_24">24.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. C. Hodson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Naga Tribes of Manipur</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 159.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_25" id="note_25" name="note_25">25.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 281.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_26" id="note_26" name="note_26">26.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Wilkes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the U.S. Exploring Expedition</span></span> (London, 1845), iii. 96.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_27" id="note_27" name="note_27">27.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">U.S. Exploring Expedition, Ethnology and Philology</span></span>, by H. Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 65. Compare Th. Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fiji and the Fijians</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 183; J. E. Erskine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of a Cruise among the Islands of the Western Pacific</span></span> (London, 1853), p. 248.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_28" id="note_28" name="note_28">28.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Turner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Samoa</span></span>, p. 335.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_29" id="note_29" name="note_29">29.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Martin Flad, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Short Description of the Falasha and Kamants in Abyssinia</span></span>, p. 19.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_30" id="note_30" name="note_30">30.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Diels, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. (Berlin, 1906) p. 81; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Herakleitos von Ephesos</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Berlin, 1909), p. 50, Frag. 136, ψυχαὶ ἀρηίφατοι καθαρώτεραι ἢ ἐνὶ νούσοις.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_31" id="note_31" name="note_31">31.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. de Castelnau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Expédition dans les parties centrales de l'Amérique du Sud</span></span>, iv. (Paris, 1851) p. 380. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> ii. 49 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> as to the practice of the Chavantes, a tribe of Indians on the Tocantins river.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_32" id="note_32" name="note_32">32.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Southey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Brazil</span></span>, iii. (London, 1819) p. 619; R. F. Burton, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Captivity of Hans Stade of Hesse</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, London, 1874), p. 122.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_33" id="note_33" name="note_33">33.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. von Dittmar, <span class="tei tei-q">“Über die Koräken und die ihnen sehr nahe verwandten Tschuktschen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Classe philologique de l'Académie Impériale des Sciences de St-Pétersbourg</span></span>, xiii. (1856) coll. 122, 124 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The custom has now been completely abandoned. See W. Jochelson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Koryak, Religion and Myths”</span> (Leyden and New York, 1905), p. 103 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</span></span>, vol. vi. part i.).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_34" id="note_34" name="note_34">34.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. von Dittmar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> col. 132; De Wrangell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Nord de la Sibérie</span></span> (Paris, 1843), i. 263 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Ethnographie Russlands nach A. F. Rittich,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermann's Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">No.</span></span> 54 (Gotha, 1878), pp. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Anadyr-Bezirk nach A. W. Olssufjew,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermann's Mittheilungen</span></span>, xlv. (1899) p. 230; V. Priklonski, <span class="tei tei-q">“Todtengebräuche der Jakuten,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lix. (1891) p. 82; R. von Seidlitz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Selbstmord bei den Tschuktschen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ib.</span></span> p. 111; Cremat, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Anadyrbezirk Sibiriens und seine Bevölkerung,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxvi. (1894) p. 287; H. de Windt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Through the Gold-fields of Alaska to Bering Straits</span></span> (London, 1898), pp. 223-225; W. Bogaras, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Chukchee”</span> (Leyden and New York, 1904-1909), pp. 560 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</span></span>, vol. vii.).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_35" id="note_35" name="note_35">35.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. A. Waddell, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Tribes of the Brahmaputra Valley,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span>, lxix. part iii. (1901) pp. 20, 24; T. C. Hodson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Naga Tribes of Manipur</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 151.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_36" id="note_36" name="note_36">36.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">K. Simrock, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der deutschen Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> pp. 177 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 507; H. M. Chadwick, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cult of Othin</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 34 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_37" id="note_37" name="note_37">37.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Procopius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De bello Gothico</span></span>, ii. 14.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_38" id="note_38" name="note_38">38.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 488. A custom of putting the sick and aged to death seems to have prevailed in several branches of the Aryan family; it may at one time have been common to the whole stock. See J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 486 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; O. Schrader, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</span></span>, pp. 36-39.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_39" id="note_39" name="note_39">39.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_40" id="note_40" name="note_40">40.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_41" id="note_41" name="note_41">41.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. B. Labat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relation historique de l'Éthiopie occidentale</span></span> (Paris, 1732), i. 260 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Winwood Reade, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Savage Africa</span></span> (London, 1863), p. 362.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_42" id="note_42" name="note_42">42.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Merolla, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relazione del viaggio nel regno di Congo</span></span> (Naples, 1726), p. 76. The English version of this passage (Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, xvi. 228) has already been quoted by Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury) in his <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origin of Civilisation</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> pp. 358 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In that version the native title of the pontiff is misspelt.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_43" id="note_43" name="note_43">43.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, iii. 6; Strabo, xvii. 2. 3, p. 822.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_44" id="note_44" name="note_44">44.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Lepsius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the peninsula of Sinai</span></span> (London, 1853), pp. 202, 204. I have to thank Dr. E. Westermarck for pointing out these passages to me. Fazoql lies in the fork between the Blue Nile and its tributary the Tumat. See J. Russeger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen in Europa, Asien und Afrika</span></span>, ii. 2 (Stuttgart, 1844), p. 552 note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_45" id="note_45" name="note_45">45.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Brun-Rollet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Nil Blanc et le Soudan</span></span> (Paris, 1855), pp. 248 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For the orgiastic character of these annual festivals, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> p. 245. Fazolglou is probably the same as Fazoql. The people who practise the custom are called Bertat by E. Marno (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen im Gebiete des blauen und weissen Nil</span></span> (Vienna, 1874), p. 68).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_46" id="note_46" name="note_46">46.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Russegger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reisen in Europa, Asien und Afrika</span></span>, ii. 2, p. 553. Russegger met Assusa in January 1838, and says that the king had then been a year in office. He does not mention the name of the king's uncle who had, he tells us, been strangled by the chiefs; but I assume that he was the Yassin who is mentioned by Brun-Rollet. Russegger adds that the strangling of the king was performed publicly, and in the most solemn manner, and was said to happen often in Fazoql and the neighbouring countries.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_47" id="note_47" name="note_47">47.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Lepsius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the peninsula of Sinai</span></span> (London, 1853), p. 204. Lepsius's letter is dated <span class="tei tei-q">“The Pyramids of Meroë, 22nd April 1844.”</span> His informant was Osman Bey, who had lived for sixteen years in these regions. An <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">anqareb</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">angareb</span></span> is a kind of bed made by stretching string or leather thongs over an oblong wooden framework.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_48" id="note_48" name="note_48">48.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I have to thank Dr. Seligmann for his kindness and courtesy in transmitting to me his unpublished account and allowing me to draw on it at my discretion.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_49" id="note_49" name="note_49">49.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to Jŭok (Čuok), the supreme being of the Shilluk, see P. W. Hofmayr, <span class="tei tei-q">“Religion der Schilluk,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, vi. (1911) pp. 120-122, whose account agrees with the briefer one given by Dr. C. G. Seligmann. Otiose supreme beings (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">dieux fainéants</span></span>) of this type, who having made the world do not meddle with it and to whom little or no worship is paid, are common in Africa.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_50" id="note_50" name="note_50">50.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. W. Hofmayr, <span class="tei tei-q">“Religion der Schilluk,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, vi. (1911) pp. 123, 125. This writer gives Nykang as the name of the first Shilluk king.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_51" id="note_51" name="note_51">51.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. W. Hofmayr, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 123.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_52" id="note_52" name="note_52">52.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is the view both of Dr. C. G. Seligmann and of Father P. W. Hofmayr (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 123).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_53" id="note_53" name="note_53">53.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The word <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">kengo</span></span> is applied only to the shrines of Nyakang and the graves of the kings. Graves of commoners are called <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">roro</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_54" id="note_54" name="note_54">54.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the use of flowing blood in rain-making ceremonies see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 256, 257 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_55" id="note_55" name="note_55">55.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dr. C. G. Seligmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Shilluk Divine Kings</span></span> (in manuscript).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_56" id="note_56" name="note_56">56.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On this subject Dr. Seligmann writes to me (March 9th, 1911) as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“The assumption of the throne as the result of victory in single combat doubtless occurred once; at the present day and perhaps for the whole of the historic period it has been superseded by the ceremonial killing of the king, but I regard these stories as folk-lore indicating what once really happened.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_57" id="note_57" name="note_57">57.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">These particulars I take from letters of Dr. C. G. Seligmann's to me (dated 8th February and 9th March 1911). They are not mentioned in the writer's paper on the subject.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_58" id="note_58" name="note_58">58.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">When one of the king's wives is with child, she remains at Fashoda till the fourth or fifth month of her pregnancy; she is then sent away to a village, not necessarily her own, where she remains under the charge of the village chief until she has finished nursing the child. Afterwards she returns to Fashoda, but the child invariably remains in the village of his or her birth and is brought up there. All royal children of either sex, in whatever part of the Shilluk territory they may happen to die, are buried the village where they were born.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_59" id="note_59" name="note_59">59.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the disappearance of the early Roman kings see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. pp. 312 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; as to the disappearance of the early kings of Uganda, see the Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 214.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_60" id="note_60" name="note_60">60.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 376 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_61" id="note_61" name="note_61">61.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“E. de Pruyssenaere's Reisen und Forschungen im Gebiete des Weissen und Blauen Nil,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Petermann's Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</span></span>, No. 50 (Gotha, 1877), pp. 18-23. Compare G. Schweinfurth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Heart of Africa</span></span>, Third Edition (London, 1878), i. 48 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> In the text I have followed de Pruyssenaere's description of the privations endured by the Dinka in the dry season. But that description is perhaps only applicable in seasons of unusual drought, for Dr. C. G. Seligmann, writing from personal observation, informs me that he regards the description as much overdrawn; in an average year, he tells me, the cattle do not die of famine and the natives are not starving. According to his information the drinking of the blood of their cattle is a luxury in which the Dinka indulge themselves at any time of the year.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_62" id="note_62" name="note_62">62.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For this and the following information as to the religion, totemism, and rain-makers of the Dinka I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. C. G. Seligmann, who investigated the Shilluk and Dinka in 1909-1910 and has most obligingly placed his manuscript materials at my disposal.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_63" id="note_63" name="note_63">63.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the importance of the rain-makers among the Dinka and other tribes of the Upper Nile, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 345 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_64" id="note_64" name="note_64">64.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Emin Pasha in Central Africa, being a Collection of his Letters and Journals</span></span> (London, 1888), p. 91; J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 529 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (from information given by the Rev. John Roscoe).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_65" id="note_65" name="note_65">65.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Father Guillemé, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, lx. (1888) p. 258; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Credenze religiose dei Negri di Kibanga nell' Alto Congo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni popolari</span></span>, vii. (1888) p. 231.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_66" id="note_66" name="note_66">66.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Travels of the Jesuits in Ethiopia</span></span>, collected and historically digested by F. Balthazar Tellez, of the Society of Jesus (London, 1710), p. 197. We may compare the death of Saul (1 Samuel, xxxi. 3-6).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_67" id="note_67" name="note_67">67.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lieut. H. Pope-Hennessy, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Jukos and other Tribes of the Middle Benue,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxx. (1900) p. (29).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_68" id="note_68" name="note_68">68.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 608, on the authority of Mr. H. R. Palmer, Resident in Charge of Katsina.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_69" id="note_69" name="note_69">69.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. T. Valdez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Six Years of a Traveller's Life in Western Africa</span></span> (London, 1861), ii. 194 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_70" id="note_70" name="note_70">70.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nathaniel Isaacs, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa</span></span> (London, 1836), i. 295 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, compare pp. 232, 290 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_71" id="note_71" name="note_71">71.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 392.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_72" id="note_72" name="note_72">72.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. dos Santos, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eastern Ethiopia,”</span> in G. McCall Theal's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Records of Southeastern Africa</span></span>, vii. (1901) pp. 194 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A more highly-flavoured and full-bodied, though less slavishly accurate, translation of this passage is given in Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, xvi. 684, where the English translator has enriched the unadorned simplicity of the Portuguese historian's style with <span class="tei tei-q">“the scythe of time”</span> and other flowers of rhetoric.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_73" id="note_73" name="note_73">73.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. dos Santos, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 193.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_74" id="note_74" name="note_74">74.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Xenophon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hellenica</span></span>, iii. 3. 3; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Agesilaus</span></span>, 3; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lysander</span></span>, 22; Pausanias, iii. 8. 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_75" id="note_75" name="note_75">75.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, iii. 20; Aristotle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Politics</span></span>, iv. 4. 4.; Athenaeus, xiii. 20, p. 566. According to Nicolaus Damascenus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fr.</span></span> 142, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. p. 463), the handsomest and bravest man was only raised to the throne when the king had no heirs, the heirs being the sons of his sisters. But this limitation is not mentioned by the other authorities.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_76" id="note_76" name="note_76">76.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Nachtigal, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saharâ und Sûdân</span></span>, iii. (Leipsic, 1889) p. 225; A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</span></span> (Jena, 1874-75), i. 220.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_77" id="note_77" name="note_77">77.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Social History of Ancient Ireland</span></span> (London, 1903), i. 311.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_78" id="note_78" name="note_78">78.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, xvii. 2. 3, p. 823; Diodorus Siculus, iii. 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_79" id="note_79" name="note_79">79.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mohammed Ebn-Omar El-Tounsy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage au Darfour</span></span> (Paris, 1845), pp. 162 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels of an Arab Merchant in Soudan</span></span>, abridged from the French by Bayle St. John (London, 1854), p. 78; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), IVme Série, iv. (1852) pp. 539 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_80" id="note_80" name="note_80">80.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. W. Felkin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Waganda Tribe of Central Africa,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</span></span>, xiii. (1884-1886) p. 711; J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) p. 77 (as to sneezing).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_81" id="note_81" name="note_81">81.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of Events in Borneo and Celebes, from the Journal of James Brooke, Esq., Rajah of Sarawak</span></span>, by Captain R. Mundy, i. 134. My friend the late Mr. Lorimer Fison, in a letter of August 26th, 1898, told me that the custom of falling down whenever a chief fell was observed also in Fiji, where it had a special name, <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">bale muri</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“fall-follow.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_82" id="note_82" name="note_82">82.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. Bruguière, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de l'Association de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, v. (1831) pp. 174 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_83" id="note_83" name="note_83">83.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Dalzel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Dahomy</span></span> (London, 1793), pp. 12 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 156 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_84" id="note_84" name="note_84">84.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Father Baudin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le Fétichisme ou la religion des Nègres de la Guinée,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xvi. (1884) p. 215.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_85" id="note_85" name="note_85">85.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Missionary Holley, <span class="tei tei-q">“Étude sur les Egbas,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xiii. (1881) pp. 351 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Here Oyo is probably the same as Eyeo mentioned above.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_86" id="note_86" name="note_86">86.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Simon Grunau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Preussische Chronik</span></span>, herausgegeben von Dr. M. Perlbach (Leipsic, 1876), i. p. 97.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_87" id="note_87" name="note_87">87.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De morte Peregrini</span></span>. That Lucian's account of the mountebank's death is not a fancy picture is proved by the evidence of Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ad martyres</span></span>, 4, <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peregrinus qui non olim se rogo immisit.</span></span>”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_88" id="note_88" name="note_88">88.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. S. Macgowan, M.D., <span class="tei tei-q">“Self-immolation by Fire in China,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Chinese Recorder and Missionary Journal</span></span>, xix. (1888) pp. 445-451, 508-521.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_89" id="note_89" name="note_89">89.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. W. Nelson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Eskimo about Bering Strait,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</span></span>, Part I. (Washington, 1899), pp. 320, 433 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_90" id="note_90" name="note_90">90.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Revelation xx. 1-3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_91" id="note_91" name="note_91">91.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Revelation xiii. 18.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_92" id="note_92" name="note_92">92.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ivan Stchoukine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Suicide collectif dans le Raskol russe</span></span> (Paris, 1903), pp. 45-53, 61-78, 84-87, 96-99, 102-112. The mania in its most extreme form died away towards the end of the seventeenth century, but during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries cases of collective suicide from religious motives occurred from time to time, people burning themselves in families or in batches of thirty or forty. The last of these suicides by fire took place in 1860, when fifteen persons thus perished in the Government of Olonetz. Twenty-four others buried themselves alive near Tiraspol in the winter of 1896-97. See I. Stchoukine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 114-126.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_93" id="note_93" name="note_93">93.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Voltaire, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Essai sur les Mœurs</span></span>, iii. 142-145 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Œuvres complètes de Voltaire</span></span>, xiii. Paris, 1878).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_94" id="note_94" name="note_94">94.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Duarte Barbosa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, London, 1866), pp. 172 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_95" id="note_95" name="note_95">95.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. di Varthema, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels</span></span>, translated by J. W. Jones and edited by G. P. Badger (Hakluyt Society, London, 1863), p. 134. In a note the Editor says that the name Zamorin (Samorin) according to some <span class="tei tei-q">“is a corruption of <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Tamuri</span></span>, the name of the most exalted family of the Nair caste.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_96" id="note_96" name="note_96">96.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Francis Buchanan, <span class="tei tei-q">“Journey from Madras through the Countries of Mysore, Canara, and Malabar,”</span> in Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, viii. 735.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_97" id="note_97" name="note_97">97.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Alex. Hamilton, <span class="tei tei-q">“A New Account of the East Indies,”</span> in Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, viii. 374.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_98" id="note_98" name="note_98">98.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The sidereal revolution of Jupiter is completed in 11 years 314.92 days (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Britannica</span></span>, Ninth Edition, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Astronomy,”</span> ii. 808). The twelve-years revolution of Jupiter was known to the Greek astronomers, from whom the knowledge may perhaps have penetrated into India. See Geminus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Eisagoge</span></span>, I, p. 10, ed. Halma.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_99" id="note_99" name="note_99">99.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Logan, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Malabar</span></span> (Madras, 1887), i. 162-169. The writer describes in particular the festival of 1683, when fifty-five men perished in the manner described.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_100" id="note_100" name="note_100">100.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir H. M. Elliot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The History of India as told by its own Historians</span></span>, iv. 260. I have to thank Mr. R. S. Whiteway, of Brownscombe, Shottermill, Surrey, for kindly calling my attention to this and the following instance of the custom of regicide.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_101" id="note_101" name="note_101">101.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">De Barros, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Da Asia, dos feitos, que os Portuguezes fizeram no descubrimento e conquista dos mares e terras do Oriente</span></span>, Decada Terceira, Liv. V. cap. i. pp. 512 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Lisbon, 1777).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_102" id="note_102" name="note_102">102.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Saxo Grammaticus,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Danica</span></span>, viii. pp. 410 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ed. P. E. Müller (p. 334 of Mr. Oliver Elton's English translation).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_103" id="note_103" name="note_103">103.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. K. Gopal Panikkar (of the Madras Registration Department), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Malabar and its Folk</span></span> (Madras, N. D., preface dated Chowghaut, 8th October 1900), pp. 120 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I have to thank my friend Mr. W. Crooke for calling my attention to this account.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_104" id="note_104" name="note_104">104.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage d'Ibn Batoutah</span></span>, texte arabe, accompagné d'une traduction par C. Deffrémery et B. R. Sanguinetti (Paris, 1853-58), iv. 246 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_105" id="note_105" name="note_105">105.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Wonders of the East, by Friar Jordanus</span></span>, translated by Col. Henry Yule (London, 1863, Hakluyt Society), pp. 32 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_106" id="note_106" name="note_106">106.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">India in the Fifteenth Century, being a Collection of Voyages to India in the century preceding the Portuguese discovery of the Cape of Good Hope</span></span>, edited by R. H. Major (Hakluyt Society, London, 1857), <span class="tei tei-q">“The Travels of Nicolo Conti in the East,”</span> pp. 27 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> An instrument of the sort described in the text (a crescent-shaped knife with chains and stirrups attached to it for the convenience of the suicide) used to be preserved at Kshira, a village of Bengal near Nadiya: it was called a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">karavat</span></span>. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Book of Ser Marco Polo</span></span>, newly translated and edited by Colonel Henry Yule, Second Edition (London, 1875), ii. 334.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_107" id="note_107" name="note_107">107.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Khasis</span></span> (London, 1907), pp. 102 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, quoting Mr. Gait in the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</span></span> for 1898.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_108" id="note_108" name="note_108">108.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</span></span> (Calcutta, 1872), p. 146.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_109" id="note_109" name="note_109">109.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. T. Valdez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Six Years of a Traveller's Life in Western Africa</span></span> (London, 1861), ii. 158-160. I have translated the title <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Maquita</span></span> by <span class="tei tei-q">“chief”</span>; the writer does not explain it.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_110" id="note_110" name="note_110">110.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ynglinga Saga</span></span>, 29 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Heimskringla</span></span>, translated by S. Laing, i. 239 sq.). Compare H. M. Chadwick, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cult of Othin</span></span> (London, 1899), p. 4. According to Messrs. Laing and Chadwick the sacrifice took place every <em class="tei tei-emph"><span style="font-style: italic">tenth</span></em> year. But I follow Prof. K. Weinhold who translates <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">hit tiunda hvert ár</span></span>”</span> by <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">alle neun Jahre</span></span>”</span> (<span class="tei tei-q">“Die mystische Neunzahl bei den Deutschen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der könig. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin</span></span>, 1897, p. 6). So in Latin <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">decimo quoque anno</span></span> should be translated <span class="tei tei-q">“every ninth year.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_111" id="note_111" name="note_111">111.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Saxo Grammaticus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia Danica</span></span>, iii. pp. 129-131, ed. P. E. Müller (pp. 98 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> of Oliver Elton's English translation).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_112" id="note_112" name="note_112">112.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Adam of Bremen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptio insularum Aquilonis</span></span>, 27 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, cxlvi. col. 644). See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. pp. 364 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_113" id="note_113" name="note_113">113.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Agis</span></span>, II. Plutarch says that the custom was observed <span class="tei tei-q">“at intervals of nine years”</span> (δι᾽ ἐτῶν ἐννέα), but the expression is equivalent to our <span class="tei tei-q">“at intervals of eight years.”</span> In reckoning intervals of time numerically the Greeks included both the terms which are separated by the interval, whereas we include only one of them. For example, our phrase <span class="tei tei-q">“every second day”</span> would be rendered in Greek διὰ τρίτης ἡμέρας, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“every third day.”</span> Again, a cycle of two years is in Greek <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="el" xml:lang="el"><span style="font-style: italic">trieteris</span></span>, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“a period of three years”</span>; a cycle of eight years is <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="el" xml:lang="el"><span style="font-style: italic">ennaeteris</span></span>, literally <span class="tei tei-q">“a period of nine years”</span>; and so forth. See Censorinus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De die natali</span></span>, 18. The Latin use of the ordinal numbers is similar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">e.g.</span></span> our <span class="tei tei-q">“every second year”</span> would be <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">tertio quoque anno</span></span> in Latin. However, the Greeks and Romans were not always consistent in this matter, for they occasionally reckoned in our fashion. The resulting ambiguity is not only puzzling to moderns; it sometimes confused the ancients themselves. For example, it led to a derangement of the newly instituted Julian calendar, which escaped detection for more than thirty years. See Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> i. 14. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Solinus, i. 45-47. On the ancient modes of counting in such cases see A. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der griechischen Chronologie</span></span> (Jena, 1888), pp. 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> According to Schmidt, the practice of adding both terms to the sum of the intervening units was not extended by the Greeks to numbers above nine.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_114" id="note_114" name="note_114">114.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> ii. 96.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_115" id="note_115" name="note_115">115.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Man, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands</span></span>, pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_116" id="note_116" name="note_116">116.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Queensland Bulletin, No. 5, Superstition, Magic, and Medicine</span></span> (Brisbane, 1903), p. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_117" id="note_117" name="note_117">117.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, p. 429.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_118" id="note_118" name="note_118">118.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 430. One of the earliest writers on New South Wales reports that the natives attributed great importance to the falling of a star (D. Collins,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Account of the English Colony in New South Wales</span></span> (London, 1804), p. 383).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_119" id="note_119" name="note_119">119.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, p. 627.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_120" id="note_120" name="note_120">120.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 488, 627 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_121" id="note_121" name="note_121">121.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Thilenius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographische Ergebnisse aus Melanesien</span></span>, ii. (Halle, 1903) p. 129.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_122" id="note_122" name="note_122">122.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. A. Junod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Ba-ronga</span></span> (Neuchatel, 1898), p. 470.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_123" id="note_123" name="note_123">123.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Hollis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Masai</span></span> (Oxford, 1905), p. 316.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_124" id="note_124" name="note_124">124.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in South Africa</span></span> (London, 1815), pp. 428 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_125" id="note_125" name="note_125">125.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</span></span> (London, 1822), ii. 204.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_126" id="note_126" name="note_126">126.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Zündel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Land und Volk der Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in Westafrika,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</span></span>, xii. (1877) pp. 415 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. Spiess, <span class="tei tei-q">“Religionsbegriffe der Evheer in Westafrika,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</span></span>, vi. (1903) Dritte Abtheilung, p. 112.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_127" id="note_127" name="note_127">127.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Boscana, <span class="tei tei-q">“Chinigchinich, a Historical Account of the Origin, etc., of the Indians of St. Juan Capistrano,”</span> in A. Robinson's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in California</span></span> (New York, 1846), p. 299.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_128" id="note_128" name="note_128">128.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Lumholtz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unknown Mexico</span></span> (London, 1903), i. 324 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_129" id="note_129" name="note_129">129.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">K. von den Steinen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), pp. 514 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The Peruvian Indians also made a prodigious noise when they saw a shooting star. See P. de Cieza de Leon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, London, 1864), p. 232.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_130" id="note_130" name="note_130">130.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Kurze, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sitten und Gebräuche der Lengua-Indianer,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</span></span>, xxiii. (1905) p. 17; W. Barbrooke Grubb, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Unknown People in an Unknown Land</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 163.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_131" id="note_131" name="note_131">131.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. Dobrizhoffer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia de Abiponibus</span></span> (Vienna, 1784), ii. 86.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_132" id="note_132" name="note_132">132.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Tetzlaff, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Laughlan Islands,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annual Report on British New Guinea, 1890-91</span></span> (Brisbane, 1892), p. 105.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_133" id="note_133" name="note_133">133.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des Veda</span></span>, p. 267.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_134" id="note_134" name="note_134">134.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1906), ii. 22.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_135" id="note_135" name="note_135">135.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Holzmayer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Osiliana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</span></span>, vii. (1872) p. 48.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_136" id="note_136" name="note_136">136.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Guillain, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Documents sur l'histoire, la géographie, et le commerce de l'Afrique Orientale</span></span>, ii. (Paris, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">N.D.</span></span>) p. 97; C. Velten, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitten und Gebräuche der Suaheli</span></span> (Göttingen, 1903), pp. 339 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. B. Klunzinger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Upper Egypt</span></span> (London, 1878), p. 405; Budgett Meakin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Moors</span></span> (London, 1902), p. 353.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_137" id="note_137" name="note_137">137.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Dieffenbach, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in New Zealand</span></span> (London, 1843), ii. 66. According to another account, meteors are regarded by the Maoris as betokening the presence of a god (R. Taylor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 147).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_138" id="note_138" name="note_138">138.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Wilkes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</span></span>, v. 88.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_139" id="note_139" name="note_139">139.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, p. 369.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_140" id="note_140" name="note_140">140.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. W. Howitt, in Brough Smyth's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aborigines of Victoria</span></span>, ii. 309.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_141" id="note_141" name="note_141">141.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Palmer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some Australian Tribes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) p. 292. Sometimes apparently the Australian natives regard crystals or broken glass as fallen stars, and treasure them as powerful instruments of magic. See E. M. Curr, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Australian Race</span></span>, iii. 29; W. E. Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin No. 5</span></span>, p. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_142" id="note_142" name="note_142">142.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Macgillivray, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.S. Rattlesnake</span></span> (London, 1852), ii. 30.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_143" id="note_143" name="note_143">143.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. A. Kleintitschen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</span></span> (Hiltrup bei Münster, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>), p. 227.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_144" id="note_144" name="note_144">144.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Rascher, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Sulka,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Anthropologie</span></span>, xxix. (1904) p. 216.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_145" id="note_145" name="note_145">145.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dudley Kidd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Savage Childhood</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 149.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_146" id="note_146" name="note_146">146.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Halkin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quelques Peuplades du district de l'Uelé</span></span> (Liège, 1907), p. 102.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_147" id="note_147" name="note_147">147.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Baumann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), p. 163.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_148" id="note_148" name="note_148">148.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Baumann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Durch Massailand zur Nilquelle</span></span> (Berlin, 1894), p. 188.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_149" id="note_149" name="note_149">149.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Petitot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Monographie des Dènè-Dindjé</span></span> (Paris, 1876), p. 60; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Monographie des Esquimaux Tchiglit</span></span> (Paris, 1876), p. 24.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_150" id="note_150" name="note_150">150.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Henry, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Lolos and other Tribes of Western China,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxiii. (1903) p. 103.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_151" id="note_151" name="note_151">151.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. Hist.</span></span> ii. 28.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_152" id="note_152" name="note_152">152.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 293; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</span></span>, p. 457, § 422; E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span>, p. 506, §§ 379, 380.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_153" id="note_153" name="note_153">153.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span>, ii. 353; J. Haltrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), p. 300; W. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen Siebenbürgens</span></span>, p. 38; E. Gerard, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land beyond the Forest</span></span>, i. 311; J. V. Grohmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</span></span>, p. 31, § 164; Br. Jelínek, <span class="tei tei-q">“Materialien zur Vorgeschichte und Volkskunde Böhmens,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</span></span>, xxi. (1891) p. 25; G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, usi e costumi Abruzzesi</span></span>, pp. 47 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. Placucci, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e pregiudizj dei contadini della Romagna</span></span> (Palermo, 1885), p. 141; Holzmayer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Osiliana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandl. der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</span></span>, vii. (1872) p. 48. The same belief is said to prevail in Armenia. See Minas Tchéraz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes sur la mythologie arménienne,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists</span></span> (London, 1893), ii. 824. Bret Harte has employed the idea in his little poem, <span class="tei tei-q">“Relieving Guard.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_154" id="note_154" name="note_154">154.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Lew, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Tod und die Beerdigungs-gebräuche bei den polnischen Juden,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) p. 402.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_155" id="note_155" name="note_155">155.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Schlossar, <span class="tei tei-q">“Volksmeinung und Volksaberglaube aus der deutschen Steiermark,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Germania</span></span>, N.R., xxiv. (1891) p. 389.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_156" id="note_156" name="note_156">156.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Boecler-Kreutzwald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1854), p. 73.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_157" id="note_157" name="note_157">157.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Monseur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folklore wallon</span></span>, p. 61; A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de France</span></span>, pp. 101, 160, 223, 267, 284; B. Souché, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Croyances, présages et traditions diverses</span></span>, p. 23; P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span>, ii. 352; J. Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du bocage normand</span></span>, ii. 13; L. Pineau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore du Poitou</span></span> (Paris, 1892), pp. 525 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_158" id="note_158" name="note_158">158.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. F. Sauvé. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</span></span> (Paris, 1889), pp. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_159" id="note_159" name="note_159">159.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Chapiseau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</span></span> (Paris, 1902), i. 290; G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, usi e costumi Abruzzesi</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), p. 48.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_160" id="note_160" name="note_160">160.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Indian Notes and Queries</span></span>, i. p. 102, § 673. Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> p. 47, § 356; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Notes and Queries</span></span>, iv. p. 184, § 674; W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</span></span> (Westminster, 1896), i. 82.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_161" id="note_161" name="note_161">161.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Polynesian Researches</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> iii. 171.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_162" id="note_162" name="note_162">162.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reise in das Innere Nord-America</span></span> (Coblenz, 1839-1841), ii. 152. It does not, however, appear from the writer's statement whether the descent of the soul was identified with the flight of a meteor or not.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_163" id="note_163" name="note_163">163.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. C. J. Ibbetson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Outlines of Panjab Ethnography</span></span> (Calcutta, 1883), p. 118, § 231.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_164" id="note_164" name="note_164">164.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span>, ii. 605 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Ninety-nine lunar months nearly coincide with eight solar years, as the ancients well knew (Sozomenus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia ecclesiastica</span></span>, vii. 18). On the religious and political import of the eight years' cycle in ancient Greece see especially K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orchomenus und die Minyer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 213-218; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 254 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 333 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 440, ii. 96, 483; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Prolegomena zu einer wissenschaftlichen Mythologie</span></span> (Göttingen, 1825), pp. 422-424.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_165" id="note_165" name="note_165">165.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ancient opinion even assigned the regulation of the calendar by the solstices and equinoxes to the will of the gods that sacrifices should be rendered at similar times in each year, rather than to the strict requirements of agriculture; and as religion undoubtedly makes larger demands on the cultivator as agriculture advances, the obligations of sacrifice may probably be reckoned as of equal importance with agricultural necessities in urging the formation of reckonings in the nature of a calendar”</span> (E. J. Payne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of the New World called America</span></span>, ii. 280).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_166" id="note_166" name="note_166">166.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the eight years' servitude of Apollo and Cadmus for the slaughter of dragons, see below, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg078">78</a>. For the nine years' penance of the man who had tasted human flesh at the festival of Zeus on Mount Lycaeus, see Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> viii. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, xviii. 17; Pausanias, viii. 2. 6; compare Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Republic</span></span>, viii. p. 565 D E. Any god who forswore himself by the water of Styx was exiled for nine years from the society of his fellow-gods (Hesiod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theogony</span></span>, 793-804). On this subject see further, E. Rohde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> ii. 211 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die enneadischen und hebdomadischen Fristen und Wochen der ältesten Griechen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der philolog.-histor. Klasse der Königl. Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften</span></span>, xxi. No. 4 (1903), pp. 24 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_167" id="note_167" name="note_167">167.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Meno</span></span>, p. 81 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>-<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>; Pindar, ed. Boeckh, vol. iii. pp. 623 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, Frag. 98.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_168" id="note_168" name="note_168">168.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">
							<p>Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Odyssey</span></span>, xix. 178 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>,</p>
							<p>τῇσι δ᾽ ἐνὶ Κνωσός, μεγάλη πόλις, ἔνθα τε Μίνως<br/>
							ἐννέωρος βασίλευε Διὸς μεγάλου ὀαριστής.</p>
							<p>with the Scholia; Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Laws</span></span>, i. I. p. 624 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b</span></span>;[<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>] <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Minos</span></span>, 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, pp. 319 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Strabo, ix. 4. 8, p. 476; Maximus Tyrius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dissert.</span></span> xxxviii. 2; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymologicum magnum</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> ἐννέωροι, p. 343, 23 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Valerius Maximus, i. 2, ext. I; compare Diodorus Siculus, v. 78. 3. Homer's expression, ἐννέωρος βασίλευε, has been variously explained. I follow the interpretation which appears to have generally found favour both with the ancients, including Plato, and with modern scholars. See K. Hoeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kreta</span></span>, i. 244 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. O. Müller,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> ii. 96; G. F. Unger, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zeitrechnung der Griechen und Römer,”</span> in Ivan Müller's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, i. 569; A. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der griechischen Chronologie</span></span> (Jena, 1888), p. 65; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die enneadischen und hebdomadischen Fristen und Wochen der ältesten Griechen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der philolog.-histor. Klasse der Königl. Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften</span></span>, xxi. No. 4 (Leipsic, 1903), pp. 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. Rohde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Psyche</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 128 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Literally interpreted, ἐννέωρος means <span class="tei tei-q">“for nine years,”</span> not <span class="tei tei-q">“for eight years.”</span> But see above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg059">59</a>, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span>.</p>
						</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_169" id="note_169" name="note_169">169.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 1. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, iii. 15. 8; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 77; Schol. on Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hippolytus</span></span>, 887; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chiliades</span></span>, i. 479 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 40; Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ecl.</span></span> vi. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ars amat.</span></span> i. 289 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_170" id="note_170" name="note_170">170.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">K. Hoeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kreta</span></span>, ii. (Göttingen, 1828) pp. 63-69; L. Preller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> ii. 119-123; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Über Selene mid Verwandtes</span></span> (Leipsic, 1890), pp. 135-139; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nachträge zu meiner Schrift über Selene</span></span> (Leipsic, 1895), p. 3; Türk, in W. H. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Roscher's Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, iii. 1666 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. J. Evans, <span class="tei tei-q">“Mycenaean Tree and Pillar Cult,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Hellenic Studies</span></span>, xxi. (1901) p. 181; A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xvii. (1903) pp. 406-412; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xv. (1904) p. 272. All these writers, except Mr. Cook, regard Minos and Pasiphae as representing the sun and moon. Mr. Cook agrees so far as relates to Minos, but he supposes Pasiphae to be a sky-goddess or sun-goddess rather than a goddess of the moon. On the other hand, he was the first to suggest that the myth was periodically acted by the king and queen of Cnossus disguised in bovine form.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_171" id="note_171" name="note_171">171.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 368 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_172" id="note_172" name="note_172">172.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bekker's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anecdota Graeca</span></span>, i. 344, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἀδιούνιος ταῦρος.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_173" id="note_173" name="note_173">173.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praeparatio Evangelii</span></span>, iii. 13. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, i. 84. 4, i. 88. 4; Strabo, xvii. 1. 22 and 27, pp. 803, 805; Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura animalium</span></span>, xi. II; Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἆπις; Ammianus Marcellinus, xxii. 14. 7; A. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Herodots Zweites Buch</span></span>, p. 552; A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die ägyptische Religion</span></span> (Berlin, 1905), p. 26; E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span> (London, 1904), i. 330.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_174" id="note_174" name="note_174">174.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. A. Wallis Budge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Gods of the Egyptians</span></span>, i. 25.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_175" id="note_175" name="note_175">175.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, i. 26. 1. For a description of the scenery of this coast, see Morritt, in Walpole's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Memoirs relating to European Turkey</span></span>, i.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_176" id="note_176" name="note_176">176.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Über Selene und Verwandtes</span></span>, pp. 30-33.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_177" id="note_177" name="note_177">177.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 130 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> We are told that Egyptian sovereigns assumed the masks of lions, bulls, and serpents as symbols of power (Diodorus Siculus, i. 62. 4).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_178" id="note_178" name="note_178">178.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to Minos and Britomartis or Dictynna, see Callimachus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hymn to Diana</span></span>, 189 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Pausanias, ii. 30. 3; Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> 40; Diodorus Siculus, v. 76. On Britomartis as a moon-goddess, see K. Hoeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kreta</span></span>, ii. 170; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Über Selene und Verwandtes</span></span>, pp. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 116-118. Hoeck acutely perceived that the pursuit of Britomartis by Minos <span class="tei tei-q">“is a trait of old festival customs in which the conceptions of the sun-god were transferred to the king of the island.”</span> As to the explanation here adopted of the myth of Zeus and Europa, see K. Hoeck, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kreta</span></span>, i. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 128-135. Moschus describes (ii. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>) the bull which carried off Europa as yellow in colour with a silver circle shining on his forehead, and he compares the bull's horns to those of the moon.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_179" id="note_179" name="note_179">179.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 76-82. Amongst the passages of classical writers which he cites are Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De facie in orbe lunae</span></span>, 30; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isis et Osiris</span></span>, 52; Cornutus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theologiae Graecae compendium</span></span>, 34, p. 72, ed. C. Lang; Proclus, on Hesiod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Works and Days</span></span>, 780; Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentar. in Somnium Scipionis</span></span>, i. 18. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> ii. 45. When the sun and moon were eclipsed, the Tahitians supposed that the luminaries were in the act of copulation (J. Wilson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</span></span> (London, 1799), p. 346).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_180" id="note_180" name="note_180">180.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theseus</span></span>, 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 61; Pausanias, i. 27. 10; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> viii. 170 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> According to another account, the tribute of youths and maidens was paid every year. See Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 14 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, with the commentary of Servius; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 41.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_181" id="note_181" name="note_181">181.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, i. 9. 26; Apollonius Rhodius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argon.</span></span> iv. 1638 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, with the scholium; Agatharchides, in Photius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, p. 443<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">b</span></span>, lines 22-25, ed. Bekker; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De saltatione</span></span>, 49; Zenobius, v. 85; Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Σαρδάνιος γέλως; Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Odyssey</span></span>, xx. 302, p. 1893; Schol. on Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Republic</span></span>, i. p. 337<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">A</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_182" id="note_182" name="note_182">182.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, i. 9. 26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_183" id="note_183" name="note_183">183.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ταλῶς.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_184" id="note_184" name="note_184">184.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, xx. 14; Clitarchus, cited by Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Σαρδάνιος γέλως, and by the Scholiast on Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Republic</span></span>, p. 337<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">A</span></span>; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De superstitione</span></span>, 13; Paulus Fagius, quoted by Selden, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dis Syris</span></span> (Leipsic, 1668), pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The calf's head of the idol is mentioned only by P. Fagius, who drew his account from a book Jalkut by Rabbi Simeon.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_185" id="note_185" name="note_185">185.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare M. Mayer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Kronos,”</span> in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</span></span>, iii. 1501 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_186" id="note_186" name="note_186">186.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chiliades</span></span>, i. 646 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_187" id="note_187" name="note_187">187.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, xviii. 590 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_188" id="note_188" name="note_188">188.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theseus</span></span>, 21; Julius Pollux, iv. 101.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_189" id="note_189" name="note_189">189.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the Game of Troy, see Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> v. 545-603; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cato</span></span>, 3; Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals</span></span>, xi. 11; Suetonius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Augustus</span></span>, 43; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tiberius</span></span>, 6; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Caligula</span></span>, 18; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nero</span></span>, 6; W. Smith's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Trojae ludus”</span>; O. Benndorf, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Alter des Trojaspieles,”</span> appended to W. Reichel's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Über homerische Waffen</span></span> (Vienna, 1894), pp. 133-139.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_190" id="note_190" name="note_190">190.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Benndorf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 133 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_191" id="note_191" name="note_191">191.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia numorum</span></span> (Oxford, 1887), pp. 389-391.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_192" id="note_192" name="note_192">192.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Benndorf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 134 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_193" id="note_193" name="note_193">193.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> xxxvi. 85.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_194" id="note_194" name="note_194">194.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Benndorf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 135; W. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Ein Labyrinth mit Versen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitzungsberichte der philosoph. philolog. und histor</span></span>. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classe der k. b. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu München</span></span>, 1882, vol. ii. pp. 267-300.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_195" id="note_195" name="note_195">195.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 312.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_196" id="note_196" name="note_196">196.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. V. Head, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historia numorum</span></span>, p. 389.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_197" id="note_197" name="note_197">197.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Censorinus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De die natali</span></span>, 18. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_198" id="note_198" name="note_198">198.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The suggestion was made by Mr. A. B. Cook. The following discussion of the subject is founded on his ingenious exposition. See his article, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 402-424.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_199" id="note_199" name="note_199">199.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the Delphic festival see Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaest. Graec.</span></span> 12; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De defectu oraculorum</span></span>, 15; Strabo, ix. 3. 12, pp. 422 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Var. hist.</span></span> iii. 1; Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Δειπνίας; K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 203 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 321-324; Aug. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Delphika</span></span> (Leipsic, 1878), pp. 206 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Th. Schreiber, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apollo Pythoktonos</span></span>, pp. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; my note on Pausanias, ii. 7. 7 (vol. ii. 53 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>). As to the Theban festival, see Pausanias, ix. 10. 4, with my note; Proclus, quoted by Photius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, p. 321, ed. Bekker; Aug. Boeckh, in his edition of Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Explicationes</span></span>, p. 590; K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orchomenus und die Minyer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 215 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 236 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 333 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. Boetticher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</span></span>, pp. 386 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; G. F. Schömann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Griechische Alterthümer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 479 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_200" id="note_200" name="note_200">200.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 4. 2, iii. 10. 4; Servius, on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vii. 761. The servitude of Apollo is traditionally associated with his slaughter of the Cyclopes, not of the dragon. But see my note on Pausanias, ii. 7. 7 (vol. ii. pp. 53 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_201" id="note_201" name="note_201">201.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 830, 838, 839. On an Etruscan mirror the scene of Cadmus's combat with the dragon is surrounded by a wreath of laurel (Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 862). Mr. A. B. Cook was the first to call attention to these vase-paintings in confirmation of my view that the Festival of the Laurel-bearing celebrated the destruction of the dragon by Cadmus (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xv. (1904) p. 411, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">224</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_202" id="note_202" name="note_202">202.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ix. 10. 2; K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 237 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_203" id="note_203" name="note_203">203.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For evidence of the wide diffusion of the myth and the drama, see Th. Schreiber, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apollon Pythoktonos</span></span>, pp. 39-50. The Laurel-bearing Apollo was worshipped at Athens, as we know from an inscription carved on one of the seats in the theatre. See E. S. Roberts and E. A. Gardner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</span></span>, ii. (Cambridge, 1905) p. 467, No. 247.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_204" id="note_204" name="note_204">204.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 4. 3; Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 494; Pausanias, ix. 10. 5; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Homeric Hymn to Apollo</span></span>, 300 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer of the Homeric hymn merely says that Apollo slew the Delphic dragon at a spring; but Pausanias (x. 6. 6) tells us that the beast guarded the oracle.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_205" id="note_205" name="note_205">205.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, x. 8. 9, x. 24. 7, with my notes; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Amores</span></span>, i. 15. 35 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jupiter tragoedus</span></span>, 30; Nonnus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dionys.</span></span> iv. 309 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Κασταλία.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_206" id="note_206" name="note_206">206.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 830, 838.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_207" id="note_207" name="note_207">207.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iphigenia in Tauris</span></span>, 1245 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, where the reading κατάχαλκος is clearly corrupt.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_208" id="note_208" name="note_208">208.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bis accusatus</span></span>, I. So the priest of the Clarian Apollo at Colophon drank of a secret spring before he uttered oracles in verse (Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals</span></span>, ii. 54; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> ii. 232).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_209" id="note_209" name="note_209">209.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iphigenia in Tauris</span></span>, 1245 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollodorus, i. 4. I; Pausanias, x. 6. 6; Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Var. hist.</span></span> iii. i; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 140; Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 519; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> Argument, p. 298, ed. Boeckh.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_210" id="note_210" name="note_210">210.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hercules Furens</span></span>, 395 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollodorus, ii. 5. II; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 26; Eratosthenes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Catasterism.</span></span> 3; Schol. on Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hippolytus</span></span>, 742; Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argon</span></span>, iv. 1396.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_211" id="note_211" name="note_211">211.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xv. (1904) p. 413.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_212" id="note_212" name="note_212">212.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> i. 448 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_213" id="note_213" name="note_213">213.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> i. I, p. 2, and ii. 34, p. 29, ed. Potter; Aristotle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peplos</span></span>, Frag. (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ii. p. 189, No. 282, ed. C. Müller); John of Antioch, Frag. i. 20 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Frag. histor. Graec.</span></span> iv. p. 539, ed. C. Müller); Jamblichus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De Pythagor. vit.</span></span> x. 52; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> Argum. p. 298, ed. Boeckh; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> i. 445 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 140.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_214" id="note_214" name="note_214">214.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Censorinus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De die natali</span></span>, 18. 6; compare Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Od.</span></span> iii. 267, p. 1466. 29.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_215" id="note_215" name="note_215">215.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De defectu oraculorum</span></span>, 3, compared with <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> 15; Aug. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Delphika</span></span>, pp. 211, 214; Th. Schreiber, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apollon Pythoktonos</span></span> (Leipsic, 1879), pp. 32 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_216" id="note_216" name="note_216">216.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Var. hist.</span></span> iii. I; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_217" id="note_217" name="note_217">217.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On the original identity of the festivals see Th. Schreiber, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apollon Pythoktonus</span></span>, pp. 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; A. B. Cook, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 404 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_218" id="note_218" name="note_218">218.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The inference was drawn by Mr. A. B. Cook, whom I follow. See his article, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 412 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_219" id="note_219" name="note_219">219.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. i. p. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_220" id="note_220" name="note_220">220.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Var. hist.</span></span> iii. 1; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> Argum. p. 298, ed. Boeckh.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_221" id="note_221" name="note_221">221.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 423 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_222" id="note_222" name="note_222">222.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ix. 3. 4. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. p. 140.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_223" id="note_223" name="note_223">223.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-god,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 402 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_224" id="note_224" name="note_224">224.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Republic</span></span>, viii. p. 565 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d e</span></span>; Polybius, vii. 13; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> viii. 81; Varro, cited by Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, xviii. 17; Pausanias, vi. 8. 2, viii. 2. 3-6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_225" id="note_225" name="note_225">225.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mary H. Kingsley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in West Africa</span></span>, pp. 536-543; T. J. Alldridge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Sherbro and its Hinterland</span></span> (London, 1901), pp. 153-159; compare R. H. Nassau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fetichism in West Africa</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 200-203.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_226" id="note_226" name="note_226">226.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. J. Alldridge, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 154.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_227" id="note_227" name="note_227">227.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</span></span>, ii. 248.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_228" id="note_228" name="note_228">228.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 5. 4; Strabo, vii. 7. 8, p. 326; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam</span></span>. iv. 563-603; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 6; Nicander, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theriaca</span></span>, 607 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_229" id="note_229" name="note_229">229.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. van Gennep, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</span></span> (Paris, 1904), p. 326.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_230" id="note_230" name="note_230">230.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dercylus, quoted by a scholiast on Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Phoenissae</span></span>, 7; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iv. 387. The writer rationalises the legend by representing the dragon as a Theban man of that name whom Cadmus slew. On the theory here suggested this Euhemeristic version of the story is substantially right.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_231" id="note_231" name="note_231">231.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_232" id="note_232" name="note_232">232.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">David Leslie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</span></span>, Second Edition (Edinburgh, 1875), p. 213. Compare H. Callaway, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religious System of the Amazulu</span></span>, Part II., pp. 196, 211.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_233" id="note_233" name="note_233">233.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_234" id="note_234" name="note_234">234.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. Livingstone, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa</span></span>, p. 615; Miss A. Werner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natives of British Central Africa</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 64; L. Decle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Three Years in Savage Africa</span></span> (London, 1898), p. 74; J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Bahima,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxvii. (1907) pp. 101 sq.; Major J. A. Meldon, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Bahima,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. 22 (January, 1907), pp. 151-153; J. A. Chisholm, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Winamwanga and Wiwa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. 36 (July, 1910), pp. 374, 375; P. Alois Hamberger, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Anthropos</span></span>, v. (1910) p. 802.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_235" id="note_235" name="note_235">235.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. W. Skeat and C. O. Blagden, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</span></span> (London, 1906), ii. 194, 197, 221, 227, 305.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_236" id="note_236" name="note_236">236.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</span></span>, pp. 74 sq.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_237" id="note_237" name="note_237">237.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This I learned from Professor F. von Luschan in the Anthropological Museum at Berlin.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_238" id="note_238" name="note_238">238.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. Delafosse, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Nature</span></span>, No. 1086 (March 24th, 1894), pp. 262-266; J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Statues of Three Kings of Dahomey,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Man</span></span>, viii. (1908) pp. 130-132. King Behanzin, surnamed the Shark, is doubtless the King of Dahomey referred to by Professor von Luschan (see the preceding note).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_239" id="note_239" name="note_239">239.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The statue was pointed out to me and explained by Professor F. von Luschan.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_240" id="note_240" name="note_240">240.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</span></span>, pp. 205 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_241" id="note_241" name="note_241">241.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xviii. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_242" id="note_242" name="note_242">242.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-q">“Animal Worship and Animal Tribes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of Philology</span></span>, ix. (1880) pp. 99 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Professor T. K. Cheyne prefers to suppose that the brazen serpent and the brazen <span class="tei tei-q">“sea”</span> in the temple at Jerusalem were borrowed from Babylon and represented the great dragon, the impersonation of the primaeval watery chaos. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Nehushtan,”</span> vol. i. coll. 3387. The two views are perhaps not wholly irreconcilable. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg111">111</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_243" id="note_243" name="note_243">243.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, viii. 41; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Themistocles</span></span>, 10; Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lysistrata</span></span>, 758 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, with the Scholium; Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Imagines</span></span>, ii. 17. 6. Some said that there were two serpents ,Hesychius and Photius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexicon</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> οἰκουρὸν ὄφιν. For the identity of the serpent with Erichthonius, see Pausanias, i. 24. 7; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Astronomica</span></span>, ii. 13; Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De spectaculis</span></span>, 9; compare Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vit. Apoll.</span></span> vii. 24; and for the identity of Erichthonius and Erechtheus, see Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 547; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymologicum magnum</span></span>, p. 371, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἐρεχθεύς. According to some, the upper part of Erichthonius was human and the lower part or only the feet serpentine. See Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 166; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Astronomica</span></span>, ii. 13; Schol. on Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Timaeus</span></span>, p. 23 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymologicum magnum</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> iii. 13. See further my notes on Pausanias i. 18. 2 and i. 26. 5, vol. ii. pp. 168 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 330 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_244" id="note_244" name="note_244">244.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 14. i; Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Wasps</span></span>, 438. Compare J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Chiliades</span></span>, v. 641.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_245" id="note_245" name="note_245">245.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1019. Compare Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ion</span></span>, 1163 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_246" id="note_246" name="note_246">246.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Immisch, in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, ii. 1023.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_247" id="note_247" name="note_247">247.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 12. 7; Diodorus Siculus, iv. 72; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 110, 175, 451.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_248" id="note_248" name="note_248">248.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, i. 36. 1. Another version of the story was that Cychreus bred a snake which ravaged the island and was driven out by Eurylochus, after which Demeter received the creature at Eleusis as one of her attendants (Hesiod, quoted by Strabo, ix. 1. 9, p. 393).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_249" id="note_249" name="note_249">249.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Stephanus Byzantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Κυχρεῖος πάγος; Eustathius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentary on Dionysius</span></span>, 507, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geographi Graeci minores</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, ii. 314.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_250" id="note_250" name="note_250">250.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἐρεχθεύς; Athenagoras, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Supplicatio pro Christianis</span></span>, 1; [Plutarch], <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vit. X. Orat.</span></span> p. 843 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b c</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Corpus inscriptionum Atticarum</span></span>, i. No. 387, iii. Nos. 276, 805; compare Pausanias, i. 26. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_251" id="note_251" name="note_251">251.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 14. 1; Herodotus, viii. 55; compare Pausanias, viii. 10. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_252" id="note_252" name="note_252">252.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg073">73</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_253" id="note_253" name="note_253">253.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 4. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Pausanias, ix. 12. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 494; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 178. The mark of the moon on the cow is mentioned only by Pausanias and Hyginus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_254" id="note_254" name="note_254">254.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, iii. 4. 2; Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Phoenissae</span></span>, 822 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> iii. 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, v. 49. 1; Pausanias, iii. 18. 12, ix. 12. 3; Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 494.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_255" id="note_255" name="note_255">255.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Proclus, quoted by Photius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, p. 321, ed. Bekker.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_256" id="note_256" name="note_256">256.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Proclus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_257" id="note_257" name="note_257">257.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> iii. 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Diodorus Siculus, v. 49. 1; Pausanias, ix. 12. 3; Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 494.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_258" id="note_258" name="note_258">258.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Schol. on Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Phoenissae</span></span>, 7 καὶ νῦν ἔτι ἐν τῇ Σαμοθρᾴκῃ ζητοῦσιν αὐτὴν [scil. Ἁρμονίαν] ἐν ταῖς ἑορταῖς. According to the Samothracian account, Cadmus in seeking Europa came to Samothrace, and there, having been initiated into the mysteries, married Harmonia (Diodorus Siculus, v. 48 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). It is probable, though it cannot be proved, that the legend was acted in the mystic rites.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_259" id="note_259" name="note_259">259.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 133. Mr. A. B. Cook has suggested that the central scene on the eastern frieze of the Parthenon represents the king and queen of Athens about to take their places among the enthroned deities. See his article <span class="tei tei-q">“Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xviii. (1904) p. 371. As the scenes on the frieze appear to have been copied from the Panathenaiac festival, it would seem, on Mr. Cook's hypothesis, that the sacred marriage of the King and Queen was celebrated on that occasion in presence of actors who played the parts of gods and goddesses. In this connexion it may not be amiss to remember that in the eastern gable of the Parthenon the pursuit of the moon by the sun was mythically represented by the horses of the sun emerging from the sea on the one side, and the horses of the moon plunging into it on the other.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_260" id="note_260" name="note_260">260.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> iii. 35 (20).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_261" id="note_261" name="note_261">261.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare Aug. Boeckh, on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Explicationes</span></span>, p. 138; L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span>, i. 366 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. F. Unger, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zeitrechnung der Griechen und Römer,”</span> in Iwan Müller's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</span></span>, i. 605 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> All these writers recognise the octennial cycle at Olympia.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_262" id="note_262" name="note_262">262.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> ii. 483; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> i. 254 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_263" id="note_263" name="note_263">263.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 1. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_264" id="note_264" name="note_264">264.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aug. Boeckh, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; A. Schmidt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der griechischen Chronologie</span></span> (Jena, 1888), pp. 50 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Dorier</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 438; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Selene und Verwandtes</span></span>, pp. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 80 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 101.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_265" id="note_265" name="note_265">265.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See Aug. Boeckh and L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">ll.cc.</span></span> More recent writers would date it on the second full moon after the summer solstice, hence in August or the last days of July. See G. F. Unger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; E. F. Bischoff, <span class="tei tei-q">“De fastis Graecorum antiquioribus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Leipziger Studien zur classischen Philologie</span></span>, vii. (1884) pp. 347 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Aug. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Über die Zeit der Olympien</span></span> (Leipsic, 1891); and my note on Pausanias, v. 9. 3 (vol. iii. pp. 488 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_266" id="note_266" name="note_266">266.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Cook, <span class="tei tei-q">“The European Sky-God,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 398-402.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_267" id="note_267" name="note_267">267.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rapp, in W. H. Roscher's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 2005 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_268" id="note_268" name="note_268">268.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 15. 3, with my note; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> iii. 60.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_269" id="note_269" name="note_269">269.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 11. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_270" id="note_270" name="note_270">270.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 16. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_271" id="note_271" name="note_271">271.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. p. 143.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_272" id="note_272" name="note_272">272.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 16. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_273" id="note_273" name="note_273">273.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Many years after the theory in the text was printed (for the present volume has been long in the press) I accidentally learned that my friend Mr. F. M. Cornford, Fellow and Lecturer of Trinity College, Cambridge, had quite independently arrived at a similar conclusion with regard to the mythical and dramatic parts played by the Olympic victors, male and female, as representatives of the Sun and Moon, and I had the pleasure of hearing him expound the theory in a brilliant lecture delivered before the Classical Society of Cambridge, 28th February 1911. The coincidence of two independent enquirers in conclusions, which can hardly be called obvious, seems to furnish a certain confirmation of their truth. In Mr. Cornford's case the theory in question forms part of a more elaborate and comprehensive hypothesis as to the origin of the Olympic games, concerning which I must for the present suspend my judgment.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_274" id="note_274" name="note_274">274.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodian, v. 6. 3-5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_275" id="note_275" name="note_275">275.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 34, p. 29, ed. Potter. The following account of funeral games is based on my note on Pausanias i. 44. 8 (vol. ii. pp. 549 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Compare W. Ridgeway, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Origin of Tragedy</span></span> (Cambridge, 1910), pp. 32 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_276" id="note_276" name="note_276">276.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_277" id="note_277" name="note_277">277.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 13. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_278" id="note_278" name="note_278">278.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> i. 146.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_279" id="note_279" name="note_279">279.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Varro, cited by Servius, on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> iii. 67.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_280" id="note_280" name="note_280">280.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Bonney, <span class="tei tei-q">“On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River Darling,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) pp. 134 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 507, 509 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; (Sir) G. Grey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West and Western Australia</span></span> (London, 1841), ii. 332.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_281" id="note_281" name="note_281">281.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</span></span>, vi. (Cambridge, 1908) pp. 135, 154.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_282" id="note_282" name="note_282">282.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 74; Apollodorus, iii. 6. 4; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span>, Introduction; Pausanias, ii. 15. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Protrept.</span></span> ii. 34, p. 29, ed. Potter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_283" id="note_283" name="note_283">283.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Scholiast on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Isthm.</span></span>, Introduction, p. 514, ed. Boeckh; Pausanias, i. 44. 8; Apollodorus, iii. 4. 3; Zenobius, iv. 38; Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scholia on Lycophron</span></span>, 107, 229; Scholia on Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Medea</span></span>, 1284; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_284" id="note_284" name="note_284">284.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 140.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_285" id="note_285" name="note_285">285.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, xxiii. 255 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 629 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 651 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_286" id="note_286" name="note_286">286.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, vi. 38.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_287" id="note_287" name="note_287">287.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, iii. 14. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_288" id="note_288" name="note_288">288.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De sera numinis vindicta</span></span>, 17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_289" id="note_289" name="note_289">289.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Thucydides, v. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_290" id="note_290" name="note_290">290.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Timoleon</span></span>, 39.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_291" id="note_291" name="note_291">291.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aulus Gellius, x. 18. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_292" id="note_292" name="note_292">292.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Arrian, vii. 14. 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_293" id="note_293" name="note_293">293.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, i. 167.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_294" id="note_294" name="note_294">294.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aristides</span></span>, 21; Strabo, ix. 2. 31, p. 412; Pausanias, ix. 2. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_295" id="note_295" name="note_295">295.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philostratus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vit. Sophist.</span></span> ii. 30; Heliodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aethiopica</span></span>, i. 17; compare Aristotle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Constitution of Athens</span></span>, 58.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_296" id="note_296" name="note_296">296.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, v. 8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_297" id="note_297" name="note_297">297.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxiii. 30. 15.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_298" id="note_298" name="note_298">298.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxxi. 50. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_299" id="note_299" name="note_299">299.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxxix. 46. 2 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_300" id="note_300" name="note_300">300.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Census of India, 1901</span></span>, vol. iii., <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Andaman and Nicobar Islands</span></span>, by Lieut.-Col. Sir Richard C. Temple (Calcutta, 1903), p. 209.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_301" id="note_301" name="note_301">301.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Letter of the missionary Chevron, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, xv. (1843) pp. 40 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_302" id="note_302" name="note_302">302.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">É. Aymonier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage dans le Laos</span></span> (Paris, 1895-1897), ii. 325 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; C. Bock, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Temples and Elephants</span></span> (London, 1884), p. 262.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_303" id="note_303" name="note_303">303.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Levchine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description des hommes et des steppes des Kirghiz-Kazaks ou Kirghiz-Kaisaks</span></span> (Paris, 1840), pp. 367 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Vambery, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Türkenvolk</span></span> (Leipsic, 1885), p. 255; P. von Stenin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Kirgisen des Kreises Saissanak im Gebiete von Ssemipalatinsk,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxix. (1906) p. 228.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_304" id="note_304" name="note_304">304.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. de Pauly, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description ethnographique des peuples de la Russie</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1862), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peuples ouralo-altaïques</span></span>, p. 29.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_305" id="note_305" name="note_305">305.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Charlevoix, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire de la Nouvelle France</span></span> (Paris, 1744), vi. 111.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_306" id="note_306" name="note_306">306.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I. Goldziher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Muhammedanische Studien</span></span> (Halle a. S., 1888-1890), ii. 328 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> However, Prof. Goldziher believes that the festival is an ancient heathen one which has been subsequently grafted upon the tradition of the orthodox prophet Salih.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_307" id="note_307" name="note_307">307.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Potocki, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage dans les steps d'Astrakhan et du Caucase</span></span> (Paris, 1829), i. 275 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Edmund Spencer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in Circassia, Krim Tartary</span></span>, etc. (London, 1836) ii. 399.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_308" id="note_308" name="note_308">308.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Radde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Chews'uren und ihr Land</span></span> (Cassel, 1878), pp. 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Prince Eristow, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Pschawen und Chewsurier im Kaukasus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</span></span>, Neue Folge, ii. (1857) p. 77.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_309" id="note_309" name="note_309">309.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. v. Hahn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Religiöse Anschauungen und Totengedächtnisfeier der Chewsuren,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxvi. (1899) pp. 211 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_310" id="note_310" name="note_310">310.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">N. v. Seidlitz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Abchasen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxvi. (1894) pp. 42 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_311" id="note_311" name="note_311">311.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) John Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span> (London, 1888), pp. 409 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cours de littérature celtique</span></span>, vii. (Paris, 1895) pp. 309 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Social History of Ancient Ireland</span></span> (London, 1903), ii. 438 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“The <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">aenach</span></span> or fair was an assembly of the people of every grade without distinction; it was the most common kind of large public meeting, and its main object was the celebration of games, athletic exercises, sports, and pastimes of all kinds”</span> (P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 438). The Irish name is <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Tailltiu</span></span>, genitive <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Taillten</span></span>, accusative and dative <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Tailltin</span></span> (Sir J. Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 409 note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_312" id="note_312" name="note_312">312.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) John Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span>, p. 411; H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cours de littérature celtique</span></span>, vii. 313 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Social History of Ancient Ireland</span></span>, ii. 434 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 441 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_313" id="note_313" name="note_313">313.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 435.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_314" id="note_314" name="note_314">314.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 434. Compare (Sir) J. Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span>, p. 411.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_315" id="note_315" name="note_315">315.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cours de littérature celtique</span></span>, vii. 313.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_316" id="note_316" name="note_316">316.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. d'Arbois de Jubainville, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> vii. 310.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_317" id="note_317" name="note_317">317.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 389, 439.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_318" id="note_318" name="note_318">318.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) J. Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span>, p. 410.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_319" id="note_319" name="note_319">319.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">(Sir) J. Rhys, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Celtic Heathendom</span></span>, pp. 411 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, quoting the substance of a note by Thos. Hearne, in his edition of <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Robert of Gloucester's Chronicles</span></span> (Oxford, 1724), p. 679. As to the derivation of the word see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">New English Dictionary</span></span> (Oxford, 1888- ) and W. W. Skeat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymological Dictionary of the English Language</span></span> (Oxford, 1910), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Lammas.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_320" id="note_320" name="note_320">320.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg100">100</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_321" id="note_321" name="note_321">321.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Golden Bough</span></span>, Second Edition, ii. 459 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_322" id="note_322" name="note_322">322.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Golden Bough</span></span>, Second Edition, ii. 460, 463, 464 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_323" id="note_323" name="note_323">323.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg014">14</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg021">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg027">27</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg033">33</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg036">36</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_324" id="note_324" name="note_324">324.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg098">98</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_325" id="note_325" name="note_325">325.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg093">93</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_326" id="note_326" name="note_326">326.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 1. 4, v. 8. 1.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_327" id="note_327" name="note_327">327.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, pp. 183-185 ed. R. Wagner (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epitoma</span></span>, ii. 3-9); Diodorus Siculus, iv. 73; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 84; Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Olymp.</span></span> i. 114; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> iii. 7. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 299 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_328" id="note_328" name="note_328">328.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, vi. 3. 9, p. 284; K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aeschylos Eumeniden</span></span> (Göttingen, 1833), p. 144.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_329" id="note_329" name="note_329">329.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, vi. 21. 9-11.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_330" id="note_330" name="note_330">330.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Kosmologie der Babylonier</span></span> (Strasburg, 1890), pp. 263 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und Epen</span></span> (Berlin, 1900), pp. 3 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 407 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian Religion and Mythology</span></span>, pp. 53 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span> (Berlin, 1902), pp. 488 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les religions sémitiques</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1905); pp. 366 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_331" id="note_331" name="note_331">331.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Kosmologie der Babylonier</span></span>, pp. 304-306; H. Gunkel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schöpfung und Chaos in Urzeit und Endzeit</span></span> (Göttingen, 1895), pp. 114 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Genesis übersetzt und erklärt</span></span> (Göttingen, 1901), pp. 107 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Creation,”</span> i. coll. 938 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. R. Driver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Book of Genesis</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (London, 1905), pp. 27 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> The myth is clearly alluded to in several passages of Scripture, where the dragon of the sea is spoken of as Rahab or Leviathan. See Isaiah li. 9, <span class="tei tei-q">“Art thou not it that cut Rahab in pieces, that pierced the dragon?”</span>: <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> xxvii. 1, <span class="tei tei-q">“In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword shall punish leviathan the swift serpent, and leviathan the crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea”</span>: Job xxvi. 12, <span class="tei tei-q">“He stirreth up the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smiteth through Rahab”</span>: Psalm lxxxix. 10, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain”</span>: Psalm lxxiv. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters. Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces.”</span> See further H. Gunkel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schöpfung und Chaos</span></span>, pp. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_332" id="note_332" name="note_332">332.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. A. Macdonell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vedic Mythology</span></span>, pp. 58-60, 158 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des Veda</span></span>, pp. 134 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_333" id="note_333" name="note_333">333.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See M. Winternitz, <span class="tei tei-q">“Der Sarpabali, ein altindischer Schlangencult,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</span></span>, xviii. (1888) pp. 44 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_334" id="note_334" name="note_334">334.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wodan,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für deutsches Alterthum</span></span>, v. (1845) pp. 484-488.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_335" id="note_335" name="note_335">335.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Kosmologie der Babylonier</span></span>, pp. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Gunkel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schöpfung und Chaos</span></span>, p. 25; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Genesis übersetzt und erklärt</span></span>, pp. 115 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 411 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 429 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 432 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Zimmern, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Creation,”</span> i. coll. 940 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 370 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 500 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; S. R. Driver, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Book of Genesis</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> (London, 1905), p. 28.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_336" id="note_336" name="note_336">336.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georgics</span></span>, ii. 336-342.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_337" id="note_337" name="note_337">337.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Kosmologie der Babylonier</span></span>, pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, pp. 677 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 371, 384 note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span>, 402, 427, 515 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian and Assyrian Literature</span></span> (New York, 1901), pp. 136, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 137, 140, 149; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Études sur les religions sémitiques</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Paris, 1905), pp. 285 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_338" id="note_338" name="note_338">338.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian Religion and Mythology</span></span>, pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_339" id="note_339" name="note_339">339.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschiedenis van den Godsdienst in de Oudheid</span></span>, i. (Amsterdam, 1903) pp. 159 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 21; H. Zimmern. in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 399; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion Babyloniens und Assyriens</span></span>, i (Giessen, 1905) pp. 117 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_340" id="note_340" name="note_340">340.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, p. 679; H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 515; M. J. Lagrange, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 286.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_341" id="note_341" name="note_341">341.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 87; M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, p. 681; H. Zimmern, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 402, 415; R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 136.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_342" id="note_342" name="note_342">342.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrisch-babylonische Mythen und Epen</span></span>, p. 29; L. W. King, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Babylonian Religion and Mythology</span></span>, p. 74.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_343" id="note_343" name="note_343">343.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This appears to be substantially the view of H. Zimmern (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 501) and of Karppe (referred to in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Creation,”</span> i. coll. 941 note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_344" id="note_344" name="note_344">344.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Moret, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Du caractère religieux de la royauté Pharaonique</span></span> (Paris, 1902), pp. 18 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 33 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_345" id="note_345" name="note_345">345.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Clement of Alexandria. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Strom.</span></span> v. 7. p. 671, ed. Potter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_346" id="note_346" name="note_346">346.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Erman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die ägyptische Religion</span></span> (Berlin, 1905), pp. 10, 25.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_347" id="note_347" name="note_347">347.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">John Parkinson (late Principal of the Mineral Survey of Southern Nigeria), <span class="tei tei-q">“Southern Nigeria, the Lagos Province,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Empire Review</span></span>, vol. xv. May 1908, pp. 290 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The account in the text of the mystery surrounding the Awujale is taken from A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</span></span> (London, 1894), p. 170.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_348" id="note_348" name="note_348">348.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">M. Jastrow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</span></span>, p. 680; H. Zimmern, in E. Schrader's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Keilinschriften und das Alte Testament</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> pp. 374, 515; C. Brockelmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wesen und Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</span></span>, xvi. (1902) pp. 391 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 396 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_349" id="note_349" name="note_349">349.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athenaeus, xiv. 44, p. 639 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>; Dio Chrysostom, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Or.</span></span> iv. pp. 69 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (vol. i. p. 76, ed. L. Dindorf). Dio Chrysostom does not mention his authority, but it was probably either Berosus or Ctesias. The execution of the mock king is not noticed in the passage of Berosus cited by Athenaeus, probably because the mention of it was not germane to Athenaeus's purpose, which was simply to give a list of festivals at which masters waited on their servants. A passage of Macrobius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> iii. 7. 6) which has sometimes been interpreted as referring to this Babylonian custom (F. Liebrecht, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Philologus</span></span>, xxii. 710; J. J. Bachofen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Sage von Tanaquil</span></span>, p. 52, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">16</span></span>) has in fact nothing to do with it. See A. B. Cook, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Classical Review</span></span>, xvii. (1903) p. 412; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xv. (1904) pp. 304, 384. In the passage of Dio Chrysostom ἐκρέμασαν should strictly mean <span class="tei tei-q">“hanged,”</span> but the verb was applied by the Greeks to the Roman punishment of crucifixion (Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Caesar</span></span>, 2). It may have been extended to include impalement, which was often inflicted by the Assyrians, as we may see by the representations of it on the Assyrian monuments in the British Museum. See also R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span>, p. 41, with the plate facing p. 54. The proper word for impalement in Greek is ἀνασκολοπίζειν (Herodotus, iv. 202). Hanging was also an Oriental as well as Roman mode of punishment. The Hebrew word for it (חלה) seems unambiguous. See Esther, v. 14, vii. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Deuteronomy, xxi. 22 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Joshua, viii. 29, x. 26; Livy, i. 26. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_350" id="note_350" name="note_350">350.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg021">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg026">26</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_351" id="note_351" name="note_351">351.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Bruno Meissner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Zur Entstehungsgeschichte des Purimfestes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, I. (1896) pp. 296-301; H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Altorientalische Forschungen</span></span>, Zweite Reihe, Bd. ii. p. 345; C. Brockelmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wesen und Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</span></span>, xvi. (1902) pp. 391 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_352" id="note_352" name="note_352">352.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Meantime I may refer the reader to <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Golden Bough</span></span>, Second Edition, ii. 254, iii. 151 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> As I have there pointed out (iii. 152 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) the identification of the months of the Syro-Macedonian calendar (that is, the ascertainment of their astronomical dates in the solar year) is a matter of some uncertainty, the dates appearing to have varied considerably in different places. The month Lous in particular is variously said to have corresponded in different places to July, August, September, and October. Until we have ascertained beyond the reach of doubt when Lous fell at Babylon in the time of Berosus, it would be premature to allow much weight to the seeming discrepancy in the dates of Zagmuk and the Sacaea. On the whole difficult question of the identification or dating of the months of the Syro-Macedonian calendar see L. Ideler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie</span></span>, i. 393 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; K. F. Hermann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Über griechische Monatskunde,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Abhandlungen der histor.-philolog. Classe d. kön. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen</span></span>, ii. (1843-44) pp. 68 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 95, 109, 111 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. F. Clinton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti Hellenici</span></span>, iii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> 351 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; article <span class="tei tei-q">“Calendarium,”</span> in W. Smith's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> i. 339. The distinction between the dates of the Syro-Macedonian months, which differed in different places, and their order, which was the same in all places (Dius, Apellaeus, etc.), appears to have been overlooked by some of my former readers.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_353" id="note_353" name="note_353">353.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Jensen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Kosmologie der Babylonier</span></span>, p. 84; C. Brockelmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wesen und Ursprung des Eponymats in Assyrien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</span></span>, xvi. (1902) p. 392. However, there is no mention of Zagmuk in Prof. R. F. Harper's translation of the inscription (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span>, p. 87).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_354" id="note_354" name="note_354">354.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Brockelmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 389-401.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_355" id="note_355" name="note_355">355.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Winckler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte Babyloniens und Assyriens</span></span> (Leipsic, 1902), p. 212; R. F. Harper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</span></span>, pp. xxxviii. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 206-216; E. Meyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Altertums</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span>, i. 2 (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1909), pp. 331 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> It was the second, not the first, year of a king's reign which in later times at all events was named after him. For the explanation see C. Brockelmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 397 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_356" id="note_356" name="note_356">356.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The eponymate in Assyria and elsewhere may have been the subject of superstitions which we do not yet understand. Perhaps the eponymous magistrate may have been deemed in a sense responsible for everything that happened in the year. Thus we are told that <span class="tei tei-q">“in Manipur they have a noteworthy system of keeping count of the years. Each year is named after some man, who—for a consideration—undertakes to bear the fortune, good or bad, of the year. If the year be good, if there be no pestilence and a good harvest, he gets presents from all sorts of people, and I remember hearing that in 1898, when the cholera was at its worst, a deputation came to the Political Agent and asked him to punish the name-giver, as it was obvious that he was responsible for the epidemic. In former times he would have got into trouble”</span> (T. C. Hodson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Native Tribes of Manipur,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxi. 1901, p. 302).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_357" id="note_357" name="note_357">357.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Brockelmann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Neujahrsfest der Jezîdîs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, lv. (1901) pp. 388-390.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_358" id="note_358" name="note_358">358.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Letter of the missionary N. Baudin, dated 16th April 1875, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, vii. (1875) pp. 614-616, 627 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, xlviii. (1876) pp. 66-76.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_359" id="note_359" name="note_359">359.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">U. Lisiansky, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">A Voyage Round the World in the Years 1803, 4, 5, and 6</span></span> (London, 1814), pp. 118 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The same ceremony seems to be more briefly described by the French voyager Freycinet, who says that after the principal idol had been carried in procession about the island for twenty-three days it was brought back to the temple, and that thereupon the king was not allowed to enter the precinct until he had parried a spear thrown at him by two men. See L. de Freycinet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage autour du monde</span></span>, vol. ii. Première Partie (Paris, 1829), pp. 596 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_360" id="note_360" name="note_360">360.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. E. Dennett, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notes on the Folklore of the Fjort</span></span>, with an introduction by Mary H. Kingsley (London, 1898), p. xxxii; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">At the Back of the Black Man's Mind</span></span> (London, 1906), p. 120. Miss Kingsley in conversation called my attention to this particular custom, and informed me that she was personally acquainted with the chief, who possesses but declines to exercise the right of succession.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_361" id="note_361" name="note_361">361.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The High History of the Holy Graal</span></span>, translated from the French by Sebastian Evans (London, 1898), i. 200-203. I have to thank the translator, Mr. Sebastian Evans, for his kindness in indicating this passage to me.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_362" id="note_362" name="note_362">362.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For a discussion of the legends which gather round Vikramaditya see Captain Wilford, <span class="tei tei-q">“Vicramaditya and Salivahana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asiatic Researches</span></span>, ix. (London, 1809) pp. 117 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Chr. Lassen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indische Alterthumskunde</span></span>, ii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> 752 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 794 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; E. T. Atkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Himalayan Districts of the North-Western Provinces of India</span></span>, ii. (Allahabad, 1884), pp. 410. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> Vikramaditya is commonly supposed to have lived in the first century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> and to have founded the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Samvat</span></span> era, which began with 57 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span>, and is now in use all over India. But according to Professor H. Oldenberg it is now certain that this Vikramaditya was a purely legendary personage (H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Literatur des alten Indien</span></span>, Stuttgart and Berlin, 1903, pp. 215 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_363" id="note_363" name="note_363">363.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Histoire des rois de l'Hindoustan après les Pandaras, traduite du texte hindoustani de Mîr Cher-i Alî Afsos, par M. l'abbé Bertrand,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal Asiatique</span></span>, IVème Série, iii. (Paris, 1844) pp. 248-257. The story is told more briefly by Mrs. Postans, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cutch</span></span> (London, 1839), pp. 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Chr. Lassen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indische Alterthumskunde</span></span>, ii.<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> 798.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_364" id="note_364" name="note_364">364.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. V. Williams Jackson, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes from India, Second Series,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the American Oriental Society</span></span>, xxiii. (1902) pp. 308, 316 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I have to thank my friend the Rev. Professor J. H. Moulton for referring me to Prof. Williams Jackson's paper.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_365" id="note_365" name="note_365">365.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Histoire des rois de l'Hindoustan,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal Asiatique</span></span>, IVème Série, iii. (1844) pp. 239-243. The legend is told with modifications by Captain Wilford (<span class="tei tei-q">“Vicramaditya and Salivahana,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asiatic Researches</span></span>, ix. London, 1809, pp. 148 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>), Mrs. Postans (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cutch</span></span>, London, 1839, pp. 18-20), and Prof. Williams Jackson (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_366" id="note_366" name="note_366">366.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Bishop of Labuan, <span class="tei tei-q">“Wild Tribes of Borneo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</span></span>, New Series, ii. (1863) pp. 26 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_367" id="note_367" name="note_367">367.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxi. (1901) pp. 197 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_368" id="note_368" name="note_368">368.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 193.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_369" id="note_369" name="note_369">369.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. E. H. Gomes, <span class="tei tei-q">“Two Sea Dyak Legends,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, No. 41 (January 1904, Singapore), pp. 12-28; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventeen Years among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</span></span> (London, 1911), pp. 278 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_370" id="note_370" name="note_370">370.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</span></span> (London, 1887), pp. 204-212.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_371" id="note_371" name="note_371">371.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The type of story in question has been discussed by Mr. Andrew Lang in a well-known essay <span class="tei tei-q">“Cupid, Psyche, and the Sun-Frog,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Custom and Myth</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 64-86. He rightly explains all such tales as based on savage taboos, but so far as I know he does not definitely connect them with totemism. For other examples of these tales told by savages see W. Lederbogen, <span class="tei tei-q">“Duala Märchen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</span></span>, v. (1902) Dritte Abtheilung, pp. 139-145 (the Duala tribe of Cameroons; in one tale the wife is a palm-rat, in the other a <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">mpondo</span></span>, a hard brown fruit as large as a coconut); R. H. Nassau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fetichism in West Africa</span></span> (London, 1904), pp. 351-358 (West Africa; wife a forest-rat); G. H. Smith, <span class="tei tei-q">“Some Betsimisaraka Superstitions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</span></span>, No. 10 (Christmas, 1886), pp. 241 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; R. H. Codrington, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Melanesians</span></span>, pp. 172, 397 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Melanesia; wife a bird, husband an owl); A. F. van Spreeuwenberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Een blik op Minahassa,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Neêrland's Indië</span></span>, 1846, Erste deel, pp. 25-28 (the Bantiks of Celebes; wife a white dove); J. H. F. Kohlbrugge, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Tenggeresen, ein alter Javanischer Volksstaam,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, iiii. (1901) pp. 97-99 (the Tenggeres of Java; wife a bird); J. Fanggidaej, <span class="tei tei-q">“Rottineesche Verhalen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, lviii. (1905), pp. 430-436 (island of Rotti; husband a crocodile); J. Kubary, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Religion der Pelauer,”</span> in A. Bastian's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Allerlei aus Volkes- und Menschenkunde</span></span> (Berlin, 1888), i. 60 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Pelew Islands; wife a fish); A. R. McMahon, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Karens of the Golden Chersonese</span></span>, pp. 248-250 (Karens of Burma; husband a tree-lizard); Landes, <span class="tei tei-q">“Contes Tjames,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cochinchine française, excursions et reconnaissances</span></span>, No. 29 (Saigon, 1887), pp. 53 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> (Chams of Cochin-China; husband a coco-nut); A. Certeux and E. H. Carnoy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Algérie traditionnelle</span></span> (Paris and Algiers, 1884), pp. 87-89 (Arabs of Algeria; wife a dove); J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kitschi-Gami</span></span> (Bremen, 1858), i. 140-145 (Ojebway Indians; wife a beaver); Franz Boas and George Hunt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Kwakiutl Texts</span></span>, ii. 322-330 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History</span></span>) (Kwakiutl Indians; wife a salmon); J. R. Swanton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Haida Texts and Myths</span></span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin</span></span>, No. 29, Washington, 1905), pp. 286 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Haida Indians; wife a killer-whale); H. Rink, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo</span></span>, pp. 146 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (Esquimaux; wife a sea-fowl). The Bantik story is told to explain the origin of the people; the Tenggeres story is told to explain why it is forbidden to lift the lid of a basket in which rice is being boiled. The other stories referred to in this note are apparently told as fairy tales only, but we may conjecture that they too were related originally to explain a supposed relationship of human beings to animals or plants. I have already illustrated and explained this type of story in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, vol. ii. pp. 55, 206, 308, 565-571, 589, iii. 60-64, 337 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_372" id="note_372" name="note_372">372.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The fable of Cupid and Psyche is only preserved in the Latin of Apuleius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metamorph.</span></span> iv. 28-vi. 24), but we cannot doubt that the original was Greek. For the story of Pururavas and Urvasi, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Rigveda</span></span>, x. 95 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hymns of the Rigveda</span></span>, translated by R. T. H. Griffith, vol. iv. Benares, 1892, pp. 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>); <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Satapatha Brahmana</span></span>, translated by J. Eggeling, part v. pp. 68-74 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. xliv.); and the references in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. p. 250, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span>. A clear trace of the bird-nature of Urvasi occurs in the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Satapatha Brahmana</span></span> (Part v. p. 70 of J. Eggeling's translation), where the sorrowing husband finds his lost wife among nymphs who are swimming about in the shape of swans or ducks on a lotus-covered lake. This has been already pointed out by Th. Benfey (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pantschatantra</span></span>, i. 264). In English the type of tale is known as <span class="tei tei-q">“Beauty and the Beast,”</span> which ought to include the cases in which the wife, as well as those in which the husband, appears as an animal. On stories of this sort, especially in the folklore of civilised peoples, see Th. Benfey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pantschatantra</span></span>, i. 254 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. R. S. Ralston, Introduction to F. A. von Schiefner's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tibetan Tales</span></span>, pp. xxxvii.-xxxix.; A. Lang, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Custom and Myth</span></span> (London, 1884), pp. 64 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; S. Baring-Gould, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Curious Myths of the Middle Ages</span></span>, pp. 561-578; E. Cosquin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contes populaires de Lorraine</span></span>, ii. 215-230; W. A. Clouston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Tales and Fictions</span></span>, i. 182-191; Miss M. Roalfe Cox, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Introduction to Folklore</span></span> (London, 1895) pp. 120-123.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_373" id="note_373" name="note_373">373.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">In the ruins of Raipoor, supposed to be the ancient Mandavie, coins are found bearing the image of an ass; and the legend of the transformation of Gandharva-Sena into an ass is told to explain their occurrence. The coins are called Gandharva pice. See Mrs. Postans, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cutch</span></span> (London, 1839), pp. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 22.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_374" id="note_374" name="note_374">374.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</span></span>, pp. 165 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_375" id="note_375" name="note_375">375.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. C. Hodson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Native Tribes of Manipur,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxi. (1901) pp. 302, 304.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_376" id="note_376" name="note_376">376.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg118">118</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_377" id="note_377" name="note_377">377.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. p. 4; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_378" id="note_378" name="note_378">378.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See Dr. Joseph Bautz, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Hölle, im Anschluss an die Scholastik dargestellt</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (Mainz, 1905). Dr. Bautz holds that the damned burn in eternal darkness and eternal fire somewhere in the bowels of the earth. He is, let us hope in more senses than one, an extraordinary professor of theology at the University of Münster, and his book is published with the approbation of the Catholic Church.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_379" id="note_379" name="note_379">379.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. H. Elliot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Experiences of a Planter in the Jungles of Mysore</span></span> (London, 1871), i. 95.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_380" id="note_380" name="note_380">380.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mrs. Postans, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cutch</span></span> (London, 1839), p. 168.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_381" id="note_381" name="note_381">381.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. Masson, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, xxiv. (1852) pp. 324 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_382" id="note_382" name="note_382">382.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. R. Schoolcraft, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Tribes of the United States</span></span>, ii. (Philadelphia, 1853), p. 68.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_383" id="note_383" name="note_383">383.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. de Azara, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages dans l'Amérique Méridionale</span></span>, ii. 181.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_384" id="note_384" name="note_384">384.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</span></span>, p. 127. The testimony of a soldier on such a point is peculiarly valuable.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_385" id="note_385" name="note_385">385.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Thevet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Singularitez de la France Antarctique</span></span> (Antwerp, 1558), pp. 74 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Cosmographie universelle</span></span> (Paris, 1575), p. 945 [979].</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_386" id="note_386" name="note_386">386.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">My informant was the late Captain W. C. Robinson, formerly of the 2nd Bombay Europeans (Company's Service), afterwards resident at 15 Chesterton Hall Crescent, Cambridge. He learned the facts in the year 1853 from his friend Captain Gore, of the 29th Madras Native Infantry, who rescued some of the victims.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_387" id="note_387" name="note_387">387.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Rev. J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Baganda</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 338.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_388" id="note_388" name="note_388">388.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg042">42</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg054">54</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_389" id="note_389" name="note_389">389.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">O. Dapper, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description de l'Afrique</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1686), p. 312; H. Ling Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Great Benin</span></span>, p. 43.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_390" id="note_390" name="note_390">390.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Southey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Brazil</span></span>, iii. 391 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_391" id="note_391" name="note_391">391.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tacitus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histor.</span></span> ii. 49; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Otho</span></span>, 17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_392" id="note_392" name="note_392">392.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Lasch, <span class="tei tei-q">“Rache als Selbstmordmotiv,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxiv. (1898) pp. 37-39.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_393" id="note_393" name="note_393">393.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Father Martin, Jesuit missionary, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</span></span>, Nouvelle Édition, xi. (Paris, 1781), pp. 246-248. The letter was written at Marava, in the mission of Madura, 8th November 1709. No doubt the English Government has long since done its best to suppress these practices.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_394" id="note_394" name="note_394">394.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Seleucus, quoted by Athenaeus, iv. 42, p. 155 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">d e</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_395" id="note_395" name="note_395">395.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Posidonius, quoted by Athenaeus, iv. 40, p. 154 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b c</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_396" id="note_396" name="note_396">396.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Euphorion of Chalcis, quoted by Athenaeus, iv. 40, p. 154 C; Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Odyssey</span></span>, xviii. 46, p. 1837.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_397" id="note_397" name="note_397">397.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Athenaeus, iv. 39, p. 153 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">e f</span></span>, quoting Nicolaus Damascenus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_398" id="note_398" name="note_398">398.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De spectaculis</span></span>, 12. The custom of sacrificing human beings in honour of the dead, which has been practised by many savage and barbarous peoples, was in later times so far mitigated at Rome that the destined victims were allowed to fight each other, which gave some of them a chance of surviving. This mitigation of human sacrifice is said to have been introduced by D. Junius Brutus in the third century <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">b.c.</span></span> (Livy, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Epit.</span></span> xvi.). It resembles the change which I suppose to have taken place at Nemi and other places, where, if I am right, kings were at first put to death inexorably at the end of a fixed period, but were afterwards permitted to defend themselves in single combat.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_399" id="note_399" name="note_399">399.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, ii. 5. 8, xxvi. 13. 15, xxviii. 29. 11; Polybius, i. 7. 12, xi. 30. 2; Th. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römisches Strafrecht</span></span> (Leipsic, 1899), pp. 916 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_400" id="note_400" name="note_400">400.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hiera Sykaminos (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Maharraka</span></span>), the furthest point of the Roman dominion in southern Egypt, lies within the tropics. The empire did not reach this its extreme limit till after the age of Augustus. See Th. Mommsen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Geschichte</span></span>, v. 594 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Strabo speaks (xvii. 1. 48, p. 817) as if Syene, which was held by a Roman garrison of three cohorts, were within the tropics; but that is a mistake.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_401" id="note_401" name="note_401">401.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">For some evidence see J. H. Gray, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">China</span></span>, i. 329 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; H. Norman, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Peoples and Politics of the Far East</span></span> (London, 1905), pp. 277 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> On this subject the Rev. Dr. W. T. A. Barber, Headmaster of the Leys School, Cambridge, formerly a missionary in China, writes to me as follows (3rd February 1902):—<span class="tei tei-q">“Undoubtedly the Eastern, through his belief in Fate, has comparatively little fear of death. I have sometimes seen the Chinese in great fear; but, on the other hand, I have saved at least a hundred lives of people who had swallowed opium out of spite against some one else, the idea being, first, the trouble given by minions of the law to the survivor; second, that the dead would gain a vantage ground by becoming a ghost, and thus able to plague his enemy in the flesh. Probably blind anger has more to do with it than either of these causes. But the particular mode would not ordinarily occur to a Western. I am bound to say that in many cases the patient was ready enough to take my medicines, but mostly it was the friends who were most eager, and exceedingly rarely did I receive thanks from the rescued.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_402" id="note_402" name="note_402">402.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. H. Gray (Archdeacon of Hong-kong), <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">China</span></span> (London, 1878), ii. 306.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_403" id="note_403" name="note_403">403.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The particulars in the text are taken, with Lord Avebury's kind permission, from a letter addressed to him by Mr. M. W. Lampson of the Foreign Office. See Note A at the end of the volume. Speaking of capital punishment in China, Professor E. H. Parker says: <span class="tei tei-q">“It is popularly stated that substitutes can be bought for Taels 50, and most certainly this statement is more than true, so far as the price of human life is concerned; but it is quite another question whether the gaolers and judges can always be bribed”</span> (E. H. Parker, Professor of Chinese at the Owens College, Manchester, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">China Past and Present</span></span>, London, 1903, pp. 378 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). However, from his personal enquiries Professor Parker is convinced that in such matters the local mandarin can do what he pleases, provided that he observes the form of law and gives no offence to his superiors.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_404" id="note_404" name="note_404">404.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">My friend, the late Sir Francis Galton, mentioned in conversation a phrase which described the fear of death as <span class="tei tei-q">“the Western (or European) malady,”</span> but he did not remember where he had met with it. He wrote to me (18th October 1902) that <span class="tei tei-q">“our fear of death is presumably much greater than that of the barbarians who were our far-back ancestors.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_405" id="note_405" name="note_405">405.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg023">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg049">49</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg052">52</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_406" id="note_406" name="note_406">406.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg113">113</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_407" id="note_407" name="note_407">407.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Aymonier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Notice sur le Cambodge</span></span> (Paris, 1875), p. 61; J. Moura, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Royaume du Cambodge</span></span> (Paris, 1883), i. 327 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For the connexion of the temporary king's family with the royal house, see E. Aymonier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 36 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_408" id="note_408" name="note_408">408.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">De la Loubère, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Du royaume de Siam</span></span> (Amsterdam, 1691), i. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Turpin, <span class="tei tei-q">“History of Siam,”</span> in Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, ix. 581 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Mgr. Brugière, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de l'Association de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, v. (1831) pp. 188 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Pallegoix, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description du royaume Thai ou Siam</span></span> (Paris, 1854), i. 250; A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</span></span>, iii. 305-309, 526-528. Bowring (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Siam</span></span>, i. 158 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) copies, as usual, from Pallegoix. For a description of the ceremony as observed at the present day, see E. Young, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</span></span> (Westminster, 1898), pp. 210 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The representative of the king no longer enjoys his old privilege of seizing any goods that are exposed for sale along the line of the procession. According to Mr. Young, the ceremony is generally held about the middle of May, and no one is supposed to plough or sow till it is over. According to Loubère the title of the temporary king was <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Oc-ya Kaou</span></span>, or Lord of the Rice, and the office was regarded as fatal, or at least calamitous <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">funeste</span></span>”</span>) to him.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_409" id="note_409" name="note_409">409.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lieut.-Col. James Low, <span class="tei tei-q">“On the Laws of Muung Thai or Siam,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Indian Archipelago</span></span>, i. (Singapore, 1847) p. 339; A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</span></span>, iii. 98, 314, 526 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_410" id="note_410" name="note_410">410.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Young, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</span></span>, pp. 212-217. The writer tells us that though the Minister for Agriculture still officiates at the Ploughing Festival, he no longer presides at the Swinging Festival; a different nobleman is chosen every year to superintend the latter.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_411" id="note_411" name="note_411">411.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ed. Chavannes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Documents sur les Tou-Kiue (Turcs) Occidentaux</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1903), p. 133, note. The documents collected in this volume are translated from the Chinese.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_412" id="note_412" name="note_412">412.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. B. Klunzinger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bilder aus Oberägypten der Wüste und dem Rothen Meere</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1877), pp. 180 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_413" id="note_413" name="note_413">413.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, p. 243. For evidence of a practice of burning divine personages, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</span></span>, Second Edition, pp. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 91 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 139 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_414" id="note_414" name="note_414">414.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Budgett Meakin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Moors</span></span> (London, 1902), pp. 312 sq.; E. Aubin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Maroc d'aujourd'hui</span></span> (Paris, 1904), pp. 283-287. According to the latter of these writers the flight of the mock sultan takes place the day after his meeting with the real sultan. The account in the text embodies some notes which were kindly furnished me by Dr. E. Westermarck.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_415" id="note_415" name="note_415">415.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Carew, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Survey of Cornwall</span></span> (London, 1811), p. 322. I do not know what the writer means by <span class="tei tei-q">“little Easter Sunday.”</span> The ceremony has often been described by subsequent writers, but they seem all to copy, directly or indirectly, from Carew, who says that the custom had been yearly observed in past times and was only of late days discontinued. His <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Survey of Cornwall</span></span> was first printed in 1602. I have to thank Mr. G. M. Trevelyan, formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, for directing my attention to this interesting survival of what was doubtless a very ancient custom.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_416" id="note_416" name="note_416">416.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. W. Boers, <span class="tei tei-q">“Oud volksgebruik in het Rijk van Jambi,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</span></span>, 1840, dl. i. pp. 372 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_417" id="note_417" name="note_417">417.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Panjab Notes and Queries</span></span>, i. p. 86, § 674 (May 1884).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_418" id="note_418" name="note_418">418.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aeneas Sylvius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Opera</span></span> (Bâle, 1571), pp. 409 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Boemus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mores, leges, et ritus omnium gentium</span></span> (Lyons, 1541), pp. 241 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</span></span>, p. 253. According to Grimm, the cow and mare stood beside the prince, not the peasant. The Carinthian ceremony is the subject of an elaborate German dissertation by Dr. Emil Goldmann (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Einführung der deutschen Herzogsgeschlechter Kärntens in den Slovenischen Stammesverband, ein Beitrag zur Rechts- und Kulturgeschichte</span></span>, Breslau, 1903).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_419" id="note_419" name="note_419">419.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Young, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</span></span>, p. 211.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_420" id="note_420" name="note_420">420.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lasicius, <span class="tei tei-q">“De diis Samagitarum caeterorumque Sarmatarum,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Respublica sive status regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae, Livoniae</span></span>, etc. (Elzevir, 1627), pp. 306 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, edited by W. Mannhardt in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magazin herausgegeben von der Lettisch-Literarischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, xiv. 91 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</span></span> (Dresden and Leipsic, 1841), ii. 27. There, are, however, other occasions when superstition requires a person to stand on one foot. At Toku-toku, in Fiji, the grave-digger who turns the first sod has to stand on one leg, leaning on his digging-stick (Rev. Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated August 26, 1898). Among the Angoni of British Central Africa, when the corpse of a chief is being burned, his heir stands beside the blazing pyre on one leg with his shield in his hand; and three days later he again stands on one leg before the assembled people when they proclaim him chief. See R. Sutherland Rattray, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Some Folk-lore Stories and Songs in Chinyanja</span></span> (London, 1907), pp. 100, 101.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_421" id="note_421" name="note_421">421.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Young, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</span></span>, p. 212.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_422" id="note_422" name="note_422">422.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</span></span>, ii. 25. With regard to swinging as a magical or religious rite, see Note B at the end of the volume. For other charms to make the crops grow tall by leaping, letting the hair hang loose, and so forth, see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 135 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_423" id="note_423" name="note_423">423.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Macrobius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saturn.</span></span> v. 19. 13.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_424" id="note_424" name="note_424">424.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_425" id="note_425" name="note_425">425.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir John Malcolm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Persia</span></span> (London, 1815), i. 527 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I am indebted to my friend Mr. W. Crooke for calling my attention to this passage.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_426" id="note_426" name="note_426">426.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Captain John Stevens, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The History of Persia</span></span> (London, 1715), pp. 356 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I have to thank Mr. W. Crooke for his kindness in copying out this passage and sending it to me. I have not seen the original. An Irish legend relates how the abbot Eimine Ban and forty-nine of his monks sacrificed themselves by a voluntary death to save Bran úa Faeláin, King of Leinster, and forty-nine Leinster chiefs, from a pestilence which was then desolating Leinster. They were sacrificed in batches of seven a day for a week, the abbot himself perishing after the last batch on the last day of the week. But it is not said that the abbot enjoyed regal dignity during the seven days. See C. Plummer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Cáin Eimíne Báin,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ériu, the Journal of the School of Irish Learning, Dublin</span></span>. vol. iv. part i. (1908) pp. 39-46. The legend was pointed out to me by Professor Kuno Meyer.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_427" id="note_427" name="note_427">427.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Ynglinga Saga,”</span> 29, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Heimskringla or Chronicle of the Kings of Norway, translated from the Icelandic of Snorro</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sturleson</span></span>, by S. Laing (London, 1844), i. 239 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. M. Chadwick, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cult of Othin</span></span> (London, 1899), pp. 4, 27. I have already cited the tradition as evidence of a nine years' tenure of the kingship in Sweden. See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg057">57</a>, with note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_428" id="note_428" name="note_428">428.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Herodotus, vii. 197; Apollodorus, i. 9. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Schol. on Aristophanes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Clouds</span></span>, 257; J. Tzetzes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 21, 229; Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argonautica</span></span>, ii. 653; Eustathius, on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, vii. 86, p. 667; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, on <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Odyssey</span></span>, v. 339, p. 1543; Pausanias, i. 44. 7, ix. 34. 7; Zenobius, iv. 38; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De superstitione</span></span>, 5; Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 1-5; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Astronomica</span></span>, ii. 20; Servius, on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> v. 241. The story is told or alluded to by these writers with some variations of detail. In piecing their accounts together I have chosen the features which seemed to be the most archaic. According to Pherecydes, one of the oldest writers on Greek legendary history, Phrixus offered himself as a voluntary victim when the crops were perishing (Schol. on Pindar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Pyth.</span></span> iv. 288). On the whole subject see K. O. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orchomenus und die Minyer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 156, 171.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_429" id="note_429" name="note_429">429.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Minos</span></span>, p. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_430" id="note_430" name="note_430">430.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaest. Graec.</span></span> 38; Antoninus Liberalis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Transform.</span></span> 10; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Metam.</span></span> iv. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_431" id="note_431" name="note_431">431.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, ix. 34. 5 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollonius Rhodius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argonautica</span></span>, iii. 265 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Hellanicus, cited by the Scholiast on Apollonius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span> Apollodorus speaks of Athamas as reigning over Boeotia (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 9. 1); Tzetzes calls him king of Thebes (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. on Lycophron</span></span>, 21).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_432" id="note_432" name="note_432">432.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The old Scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Argon.</span></span> ii. 653) tells us that down to his time it was customary for one of the descendants of Athamas to enter the town-hall and sacrifice to Laphystian Zeus. K. O. Müller sees in this custom a mitigation of the ancient rule—instead of being themselves sacrificed, the scions of royalty were now permitted to offer sacrifice (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orchomenus und die Minyer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 158). But this need not have been so. The obligation to serve as victims in certain circumstances lay only on the eldest male of each generation in the direct line; the sacrificers may have been younger brothers or more remote relations of the destined victims. It may be observed that in a dynasty of which the eldest males were regularly sacrificed, the kings, if they were not themselves the victims, must always have been younger sons.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_433" id="note_433" name="note_433">433.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. i. p. 310.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_434" id="note_434" name="note_434">434.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">I have followed K. O. Müller (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Orchomenus und die Minyer</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> pp. 160, 166 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>) in regarding the ram which saved Phrixus as a mythical expression for the substitution of a ram for a human victim. He points out that a ram was the proper victim to sacrifice to Trophonius (Pausanias, ix. 39. 6), whose very ancient worship was practised at Lebadea not far from Orchomenus. The principle of vicarious sacrifices was familiar enough to the Greeks, as K. O. Müller does not fail to indicate. At Potniae, near Thebes, goats were substituted as victims instead of boys in the sacrifices offered to Dionysus (Pausanias, ix. 8. 2). Once when an oracle commanded that a girl should be sacrificed to Munychian Artemis in order to stay a plague or famine, a goat dressed up as a girl was sacrificed instead (Eustathius on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, ii. 732, p. 331; Apostolius, vii. 10; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Paroemiogr. Graeci</span></span>, ed. Leutsch et Schneidewin, ii. 402; Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Ἔμβαρος). At Salamis in Cyprus a man was annually sacrificed to Aphrodite and afterwards to Diomede, but in later times an ox was substituted (Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De abstinentia</span></span>, ii. 54). At Laodicea in Syria a deer took the place of a maiden as the victim yearly offered to Athena (Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 56). Since human sacrifices have been forbidden by the Dutch Government in Borneo, the Barito and other Dyak tribes of that island have kept cattle for the sole purpose of sacrificing them instead of human beings at the close of mourning and at other religious ceremonies. See A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quer durch Borneo</span></span>, ii. (Leyden, 1907), p. 127.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_435" id="note_435" name="note_435">435.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philo of Byblus, quoted by Eusebius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Praeparatio Evangelii</span></span>, i. 10. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_436" id="note_436" name="note_436">436.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings iii. 27.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_437" id="note_437" name="note_437">437.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">On this subject see Dr. G. F. Moore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Molech, Moloch,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, iii. 3183 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; C. P. Tiele, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</span></span>, i. (Gotha, 1896) pp. 240-244.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_438" id="note_438" name="note_438">438.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De abstinentia</span></span>, ii. 56.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_439" id="note_439" name="note_439">439.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Minos</span></span>, p. 315 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">c</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_440" id="note_440" name="note_440">440.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Regum et imperatorum apophthegmata, Gelon I.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_441" id="note_441" name="note_441">441.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Diodorus Siculus, xx. 14. Compare Clitarchus, cited by Suidas, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> σαρδάνιος γέλως, and by the Scholiast on Plato, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Republic</span></span>, p. 337 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">a</span></span>; J. Selden, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De dis Syris</span></span> (Leipsic, 1668), pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_442" id="note_442" name="note_442">442.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De superstitione</span></span>, 13. Egyptian mothers were glad and proud when their children were devoured by the holy crocodiles. See Aelian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura animalium</span></span>, x. 21; Maximus Tyrius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dissert.</span></span> viii. 5; Josephus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Apion.</span></span> ii. 7.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_443" id="note_443" name="note_443">443.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Tertullian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Apologeticus</span></span>, 6. Compare Justin, xviii. 6. 12; Ennius, cited by Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Puelli,”</span> pp. 248, 249, ed. C. O. Müller; Augustine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De civitate Dei</span></span>, vii. 19 and 26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_444" id="note_444" name="note_444">444.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“Every abomination to the Lord, which he hateth, have they done unto their gods; for even their sons and their daughters do they burn in the fire to their gods,”</span> Deuteronomy xii. 31. Here and in what follows I quote the Revised English Version.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_445" id="note_445" name="note_445">445.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Deuteronomy xviii. 9-12.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_446" id="note_446" name="note_446">446.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Leviticus xviii. 21.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_447" id="note_447" name="note_447">447.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Psalms cvi. 35-38.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_448" id="note_448" name="note_448">448.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xvii. 16, 17.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_449" id="note_449" name="note_449">449.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“And they have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire,”</span> Jeremiah vii. 31; <span class="tei tei-q">“And have built the high places of Baal, to burn their sons in the fire for burnt offerings unto Baal,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> xix. 5; <span class="tei tei-q">“And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire unto Molech,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span> xxxii. 35; <span class="tei tei-q">“Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be devoured. Were thy whoredoms a small matter, that thou hast slain my children, and delivered them up, in causing them to pass through the fire unto them?”</span> Ezekiel xvi. 20 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; compare xx. 26, 31. A comparison of these passages shews that the expression <span class="tei tei-q">“to cause to pass through the fire,”</span> so often employed in this connexion in Scripture, meant to burn the children in the fire. Some have attempted to interpret the words in a milder sense. See J. Spencer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De legibus Hebraeorum</span></span> (The Hague, 1686), i. 288 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_450" id="note_450" name="note_450">450.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Chronicles xxviii. 3. In the corresponding passage of 2 Kings (xvi. 3) it is said that Ahaz <span class="tei tei-q">“made his son to pass through the fire.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_451" id="note_451" name="note_451">451.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Chronicles xxxiii. 6; compare 2 Kings xxi. 6.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_452" id="note_452" name="note_452">452.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xxiii. 10.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_453" id="note_453" name="note_453">453.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Jerome on Jeremiah vii. 31, quoted in Winer's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Biblisches Realwôrterbuch</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Thopeth.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_454" id="note_454" name="note_454">454.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Tel El-Amarna tablets prove that <span class="tei tei-q">“the prae-Israelitish inhabitants of Canaan were closely akin to the Hebrews, and that they spoke substantially the same language”</span> (S. R. Driver, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Authority and Archaeology, Sacred and Profane</span></span>, edited by D. G. Hogarth (London, 1899), p. 76).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_455" id="note_455" name="note_455">455.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings xvii. 31. The identification of Sepharvaim is uncertain. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Encyclopaedia Biblica</span></span>, iv. 4371 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_456" id="note_456" name="note_456">456.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Micah vi. 6-8.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_457" id="note_457" name="note_457">457.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ezekiel xx. 25, 26, 31.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_458" id="note_458" name="note_458">458.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus xiii. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_459" id="note_459" name="note_459">459.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus xiii. 12.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_460" id="note_460" name="note_460">460.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus xxxiv. 19. In the Authorised Version the passage runs thus: <span class="tei tei-q">“All that openeth the matrix is mine; and every firstling among thy cattle, whether ox or sheep, that is male.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_461" id="note_461" name="note_461">461.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus xxii. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The Authorised Version has <span class="tei tei-q">“the first of thy ripe fruits" instead of "the abundance of thy fruits.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_462" id="note_462" name="note_462">462.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Numbers xviii. 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Elsewhere, however, we read: <span class="tei tei-q">“All the firstling males that are born of thy herd and of thy flock thou shalt sanctify unto the Lord thy God: thou shalt do no work with the firstling of thine ox, nor shear the firstling of thy flock. Thou shalt eat it before the Lord thy God year by year in the place which the Lord shall choose, thou and thy household,”</span> Deuteronomy xv. 19 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Deuteronomy xii. 6 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 17 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> To reconcile this ordinance with the other we must suppose that the flesh was divided between the Levite and the owner of the animal. But perhaps the rule in Deuteronomy may represent the old custom which obtained before the rise of the priestly caste. Prof. S. R. Driver inclines to the latter view (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Commentary on Deuteronomy</span></span>, p. 187).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_463" id="note_463" name="note_463">463.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus xiii. 13, xxxiv. 20.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_464" id="note_464" name="note_464">464.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Numbers xviii. 15 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare Numbers iii. 46-51; Exodus xiii. 13, xxxiv. 20.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_465" id="note_465" name="note_465">465.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus xi.-xiii. 16; Numbers iii. 13, viii. 17. While many points in this strange story remain obscure, the reason which moved the Israelites of old to splash the blood of lambs on the doorposts of their houses at the Passover may perhaps have been not very different from that which induces the Sea Dyaks of Borneo to do much the same thing at the present day. <span class="tei tei-q">“When there is any great epidemic in the country—when cholera or smallpox is killing its hundreds on all sides—one often notices little offerings of food hung on the walls and from the ceiling, animals killed in sacrifice, and blood splashed on the posts of the houses. When one asks why all this is done, they say they do it in the hope that when the evil spirit, who is thirsting for human lives, comes along and sees the offerings they have made and the animals killed in sacrifice, he will be satisfied with these things, and not take the lives of any of the people living in the Dyak village house”</span> (E. H. Gomes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventeen Years among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</span></span>, London, 1911, p. 201). Similarly in Western Africa, when a pestilence or an attack of enemies is expected, it is customary to sacrifice sheep and goats and smear their blood on the gateways of the village (Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in West Africa</span></span>, p. 454, compare p. 45). In Peru, when an Indian hut is cleansed and whitewashed, the blood of a llama is always sprinkled on the doorway and internal walls in order to keep out the evil spirit (Col. Church, cited by E. J. Payne, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of the New World called America</span></span>, i. 394, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span>). For more evidence of the custom of pouring or smearing blood on the threshold, lintel, and side-posts of doors, see Ph. Paulitschke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</span></span> (Berlin, 1896), pp. 38, 48; J. Goldziher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Muhamedanische Studien</span></span>, ii. 329; S. J. Curtiss, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</span></span>, pp. 181-193, 227 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. C. Trumbull, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Threshold Covenant</span></span> (New York, 1896), pp. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 26-28, 66-68. Perhaps the original intention of the custom was to avert evil influence, especially evil spirits, from the door.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_466" id="note_466" name="note_466">466.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Genesis xxii. 1-13.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_467" id="note_467" name="note_467">467.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See for example Father Baudin, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xvi. (1894) p. 333; A. B. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</span></span>, pp. 105 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_468" id="note_468" name="note_468">468.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. E. Maxwell, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Folklore of the Malays,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, No. 7 (June 1881), p. 14; W. W. Skeat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Malay Magic</span></span>, p. 112. The bird in question is thought to be the goat-sucker or night-jar.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_469" id="note_469" name="note_469">469.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">2 Kings iii. 27.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_470" id="note_470" name="note_470">470.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg166">166</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg167">167</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_471" id="note_471" name="note_471">471.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">As to the redemption of the firstborn among modern Jews, see L. Löw, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Lebensalter in der jüdischen Literatur</span></span> (Szegedin, 1875), pp. 110-118; Budgett Meakin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Moors</span></span> (London, 1902), pp. 440 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_472" id="note_472" name="note_472">472.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Wellhausen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Prolegomena zur Geschichte Israels</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> p. 90; W. Robertson Smith, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religion of the Semites</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> p. 464. On the other hand, when I published the foregoing discussion in the second edition of my book, I was not aware that the conclusion reached in it had been anticipated by Prof. Th. Nöldeke, who has drawn the same inference from the same evidence. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft</span></span>, xlii. (1888) p. 483. I am happy to find myself in agreement with so eminent an authority on Semitic antiquity.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_473" id="note_473" name="note_473">473.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Brough Smyth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aborigines of Victoria</span></span>, ii. 311. In the Luritcha tribe of central Australia <span class="tei tei-q">“young children are sometimes killed and eaten, and it is not an infrequent custom, when a child is in weak health, to kill a younger and healthy one and then to feed the weakling on its flesh, the idea being that this will give the weak child the strength of the stronger one”</span> (Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, p. 475). The practice seems to have been common among the Australian aborigines. See W. E. Stanbridge, quoted by R. Brough Smyth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 52; A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, pp. 749, 750.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_474" id="note_474" name="note_474">474.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Scriviner, in E. Curr's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Australian Race</span></span>, ii. 182.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_475" id="note_475" name="note_475">475.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, p. 750.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_476" id="note_476" name="note_476">476.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. Gason, in E. Curr's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Australian Race</span></span>, ii. 119.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_477" id="note_477" name="note_477">477.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Father Mazzuconi, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, xxvii. (1855) pp. 368 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_478" id="note_478" name="note_478">478.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religious System of China</span></span>, ii. 679, iv. 364.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_479" id="note_479" name="note_479">479.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. J. M. de Groot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 365. On these Chinese reports Prof. de Groot remarks (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> iv. 366): <span class="tei tei-q">“Quite at a loss, however, we are to explain that eating of firstborn sons by their own nearest kinsfolk, absolutely inconsistent as it is with a primary law of tribal life in general, which imperiously demands that the tribe should make itself strong in male cognates, but not indulge in self-destruction by killing its natural defenders. We feel, therefore, strongly inclined to believe the statement fabulous.”</span> Such scepticism implies an opinion of the good sense and foresight of savages which is far from being justified by the facts. Many savage tribes have <span class="tei tei-q">“indulged in self-destruction”</span> by killing a large proportion of their children, both male and female. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg196">196</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_480" id="note_480" name="note_480">480.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</span></span>, ii. 169.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_481" id="note_481" name="note_481">481.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. A. Rose, <span class="tei tei-q">“Unlucky Children,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xiii. (1902) p. 63; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xxxi. (1902) pp. 162 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Mr. Rose is Superintendent of Ethnography in the Punjaub. The authorities cited by him are Moore's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hindu Infanticide</span></span>, pp. 198 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, and Sherring's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Hindu Tribes and Castes</span></span>, iii. p. 66.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_482" id="note_482" name="note_482">482.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Captain Philip Maud, <span class="tei tei-q">“Exploration in the Southern Borderland of Abyssinia,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Geographical Journal</span></span>, xxiii. (1904) pp. 567 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_483" id="note_483" name="note_483">483.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Exodus iv. 24-26.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_484" id="note_484" name="note_484">484.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Captain C. H. Stigand, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">To Abyssinia through an Unknown Land</span></span> (London, 1910), pp. 234 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_485" id="note_485" name="note_485">485.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) p. 30. Mr. Roscoe informs me that a similar custom prevails also in Koki and Bunyoro.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_486" id="note_486" name="note_486">486.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. L. Krapf, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours during an Eighteen Years' Residence in Eastern Africa</span></span> (London, 1860), pp. 69 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Dr. Krapf, who reports the custom at second hand, thinks that the existence of the pillar may be doubted, but that the rest of the story harmonises well enough with African superstition.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_487" id="note_487" name="note_487">487.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Macdonald, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Light in Africa</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (London, 1890), p. 156. In the text I have embodied some fuller explanations and particulars which my friend the Rev. Mr. Macdonald was good enough to send me in a letter dated September 16th, 1899. Among the tribes with which Mr. Macdonald is best acquainted the custom is obsolete and lives only in tradition; formerly it was universally practised.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_488" id="note_488" name="note_488">488.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. J. Mone, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des Heidenthums im nördlichen Europa</span></span> (Leipsic and Darmstadt, 1822-1823), i. 119.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_489" id="note_489" name="note_489">489.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Vallancey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Collectanea de rebus Hibernicis</span></span>, vol. iii. (Dublin, 1786) p. 457; D. Nutt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Voyage of Bran</span></span>, ii. 149-151, 304 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; P. W. Joyce, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Social History of Ancient Ireland</span></span>, i. 275 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 281-284. The authority for the tradition is the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dinnschenchas</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dinnsenchus</span></span>, a document compiled in the eleventh and twelfth centuries out of older materials. Mr. Joyce discredits the tradition of human sacrifice.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_490" id="note_490" name="note_490">490.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-q">“Fourth Annual Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association for 1888</span></span>, p. 242; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fifth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, p. 52 (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association for 1889</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_491" id="note_491" name="note_491">491.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Boas, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fifth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</span></span>, p. 46 (separate reprint from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Report of the British Association for 1889</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_492" id="note_492" name="note_492">492.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Strachey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historie of travaile into Virginia Britannia</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, London, 1849), p. 84.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_493" id="note_493" name="note_493">493.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Bricknell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natural History of North Carolina</span></span> (Dublin, 1737), pp. 342 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> I have taken the liberty of altering slightly the writer's somewhat eccentric punctuation.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_494" id="note_494" name="note_494">494.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg162">162</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_495" id="note_495" name="note_495">495.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Herrera, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The General History of the Vast Continent and Islands of America</span></span>, translated by Capt. John Stevens (London, 1725-6), iv. 347 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Compare J. de Acosta, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Natural and Moral History of the Indies</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, London, 1880), ii. 344.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_496" id="note_496" name="note_496">496.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Xeres, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relation véridique de la conquête du Perou et de la Province de Cuzco nommée Nouvelle-Castille</span></span> (in H. Ternaux-Compans's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages, relations et mémoires</span></span>, etc., Paris, 1837), p. 53.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_497" id="note_497" name="note_497">497.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Juan de Velasco, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire du royaume de Quito</span></span>, i. (Paris, 1840) p. 106 (forming vol. xviii. of H. Ternaux-Compans's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages, relations et mémoires</span></span>, etc.).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_498" id="note_498" name="note_498">498.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. R. Wallace, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of Travels on the Amazon and Rio Negro</span></span> (London, 1889), p. 355.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_499" id="note_499" name="note_499">499.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Barbrooke Grubb, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Unknown People in an Unknown Land</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 233.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_500" id="note_500" name="note_500">500.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De verborum significatione</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.vv.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Mamertini,”</span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Sacrani,”</span> and <span class="tei tei-q">“Ver sacrum,”</span> pp. 158, 370, 371, 379, ed. C. O. Müller; Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vii. 796; Nonius Marcellus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“ver sacrum,”</span> p. 522 (p. 610, ed. Quicherat); Varro, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rerum rusticarum</span></span>, iii. 16. 29; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Rom.</span></span> i. 16 and 23 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ii. 1. 2.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_501" id="note_501" name="note_501">501.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Strabo, v. 4. 2 and 12; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> iii. 110; Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De verborum significatione</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Irpini,”</span> ed. C. O. Müller, p. 106. It is worthy of note that the three swarms which afterwards developed into the Piceni, the Samnites, and the Hirpini were said to have been guided by a woodpecker, a bull, and a wolf respectively, of which the woodpecker (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">picus</span></span>) and the wolf (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">hirpus</span></span>) gave their names to the Piceni and the Hirpini. The tradition may perhaps preserve a trace of totemism, but in the absence of clearer evidence it would be rash to assume that it does so. The woodpecker was sacred among the Latins, and a woodpecker as well as a wolf is said to have fed the twins Romulus and Remus (Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quaest. Rom.</span></span> 21; Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iii. 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Does this legend point to the existence of a wolf-clan and a woodpecker-clan at Rome? There was perhaps a similar conjunction of wolf and woodpecker at Soracte, for the woodpecker is spoken of as the bird of Feronia (<span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">picus Feronius</span></span>,”</span> Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Oscines,”</span> p. 197, ed. C. O. Müller), a goddess in whose sanctuary at Soracte certain men went by the name of Soranian Wolves (Servius, on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> xi. 785; Pliny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Nat. hist.</span></span> vii. 19; Strabo, v. 2. 9). These <span class="tei tei-q">“Soranian Wolves”</span> will meet us again later on.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_502" id="note_502" name="note_502">502.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxii. 9 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Plutarch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabius Maximus</span></span>, 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_503" id="note_503" name="note_503">503.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Livy, xxxiv. 44.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_504" id="note_504" name="note_504">504.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Rom.</span></span> i. 24.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_505" id="note_505" name="note_505">505.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Schwegler thought it hardly open to question that the <span class="tei tei-q">“sacred spring”</span> was a substitute for an original custom of human sacrifice (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Römische Geschichte</span></span>, i. 240 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). The inference is denied on insufficient grounds by R. von Ihering (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Vorgeschichte der Indoeuropäer</span></span>, pp. 309 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_506" id="note_506" name="note_506">506.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Antiquit. Rom.</span></span> i. 16. 1. Rhegium in Italy was founded by Chalcidian colonists, who in obedience to the Delphic Oracle had been dedicated as a tithe-offering to Apollo on account of a dearth (Strabo, vi. 1. 6, p. 257). Justin speaks of the Gauls sending out three hundred thousand men, <span class="tei tei-q">“as it were a sacred spring,”</span> to seek a new home (Justin, xxiv. 4. 1).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_507" id="note_507" name="note_507">507.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The Australian aborigines resort to infanticide to keep down the number of a family. But <span class="tei tei-q">“the number is kept down, not with any idea at all of regulating the food supply, so far as the adults are concerned, but simply from the point of view that, if the mother is suckling one child, she cannot properly provide food for another, quite apart from the question of the trouble of carrying two children about. An Australian native never looks far enough ahead to consider what will be the effect on the food supply in future years if he allows a particular child to live; what affects him is simply the question of how it will interfere with the work of his wife so far as their own camp is concerned”</span> (Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, p. 264).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_508" id="note_508" name="note_508">508.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg057">57</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg160">160</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_509" id="note_509" name="note_509">509.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg185">185</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_510" id="note_510" name="note_510">510.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Father Baudin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Le Fétichisme,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xvi. (1884) p. 259.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_511" id="note_511" name="note_511">511.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Laws of Manu</span></span>, ix. 8, p. 329, G. Bühler's translation (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sacred Books of the East</span></span>, vol. xxv.). On this Hindoo doctrine of reincarnation, its logical consequences and its analogies in other parts of the world, see J. von Negelein, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eine Quelle der indischen Seelenwanderungvorstellung,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, vi. (1903) pp. 320-333. Compare E. S. Hartland, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Legend of Perseus</span></span>, i. 218 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Primitive Paternity</span></span> (London, 1909-1910), ii. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_512" id="note_512" name="note_512">512.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. A. [J. A.] Rose, <span class="tei tei-q">“Unlucky and Lucky Children, and some Birth Superstitions,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xxxi. (1902) p. 516; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folklore</span></span>, xiii. (1902) pp. 278 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> As to the Khatris, see D. C. J. Ibbetson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Outlines of Panjab Ethnography</span></span>, pp. 295 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. H. Risley, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tribes and Castes of Bengal</span></span>, i. 478 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Tribes and Castes of the North-western Provinces and Oudh</span></span>, iii. 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_513" id="note_513" name="note_513">513.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">The same suggestion has been made by Dr. E. Westermarck (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas</span></span>, i. (London, 1906) pp. 460 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>). Some years ago, before the publication of his book and while the present volume was still in proof, Dr. Westermarck and I in conversation discovered that we had independently arrived at the same conjectural explanation of the custom of killing the firstborn.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_514" id="note_514" name="note_514">514.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Capt. J. Cook, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages</span></span> (London, 1809), i. 225 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Capt. J. Wilson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</span></span> (London, 1799), pp. 327, 330, 333; W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Polynesian Researches</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> iii. 99-101; J. A. Mourenhout, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages aux îles du Grand Océan</span></span>, ii. 13 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Mathias G. ——, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres sur les Îles Marquises</span></span> (Paris, 1843), pp. 103 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Hale, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnography and Philology</span></span> (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 34.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_515" id="note_515" name="note_515">515.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Ellis, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Polynesian Researches</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 251-253.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_516" id="note_516" name="note_516">516.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. E. Erskine, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of a Cruise among the Islands of the Western Pacific</span></span> (London, 1853), p. 233.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_517" id="note_517" name="note_517">517.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands</span></span> (London, 1836), pp. 117 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_518" id="note_518" name="note_518">518.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Campbell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</span></span> (London, 1822), ii. 276.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_519" id="note_519" name="note_519">519.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hesiod, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Theogony</span></span>, 137 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 453 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 886 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollodorus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bibliotheca</span></span>, i. 1-3.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_520" id="note_520" name="note_520">520.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg179">179</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Traces of a custom of sacrificing the children instead of the father may perhaps be found in the legends that Menoeceus, son of Creon, died to save Thebes, and that one or more of the daughters of Erechtheus perished to save Athens. See Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Phoenissae</span></span>, 889 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Apollodorus, iii. 6. 7, iii. 15. 4; Schol. on Aristides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Panathen.</span></span> p. 113, ed. Dindorf; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tuscul.</span></span>, i. 48. 116; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura deorum</span></span>, iii. 19. 50; W. H. Roscher, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lexikon d. griech. und röm. Mythologie</span></span>, i. 1298 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, ii. 2794 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_521" id="note_521" name="note_521">521.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. pp. 269 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_522" id="note_522" name="note_522">522.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, vol. ii. p. 283. The Oedipus legend would conform still more closely to custom if we could suppose that marriage with a mother was formerly allowed in cases where the king had neither a sister nor a stepmother, by marrying whom he could otherwise legalise his claim to the throne.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_523" id="note_523" name="note_523">523.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Examples of this custom are collected by me in a note on Pausanias, i. 7. 1 (vol. ii. p. 85). For other instances see V. Noel, <span class="tei tei-q">“Île de Madagascar, recherches sur les Sakkalava,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), Deuxième Série, xx. (Paris, 1843) pp. 63 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> (among the Sakkalavas of Madagascar); V. L. Cameron, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Across Africa</span></span> (London, 1877), ii. 70, 149; J. Roscoe, <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) p. 27 (among the Baganda of Central Africa); J. G. Frazer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Totemism and Exogamy</span></span>, ii. 523, 538 (among the Banyoro and Bahima); J. Dos Santos, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eastern Ethiopia,”</span> in G. McCall Theal's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Records of South-Eastern Africa</span></span>, vii. 191 (as to the kings of Sofala in eastern Africa). But Dos Santos's statement is doubted by Dr. McCall Theal (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 395).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_524" id="note_524" name="note_524">524.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This explanation of the custom was anticipated by McLennan: <span class="tei tei-q">“Another rule of chiefly succession, which has been mentioned, that which gave the chiefship to a sister's son, appears to have been nullified in some cases by an extraordinary but effective expedient—by the chief, that is, marrying his own sister”</span> (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Patriarchal Theory, based on the Papers of the late John Ferguson McLennan</span></span>, edited and completed by Donald McLennan (London, 1885), p. 95).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_525" id="note_525" name="note_525">525.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Compare Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De natura deorum</span></span>, ii. 26. 66; [Plutarch], <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De vita et poesi Homeri</span></span>, ii. 96; Lactantius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Divin. Inst.</span></span> i. 10; Firmicus Maternus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De errore profanarum religionum</span></span>, xii. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_526" id="note_526" name="note_526">526.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De abstinentia</span></span>, ii. 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_527" id="note_527" name="note_527">527.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 292 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_528" id="note_528" name="note_528">528.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">See The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 269 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_529" id="note_529" name="note_529">529.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Men and women of the Khlysti sect in Russia abhor marriage; and in the sect of the Skoptsi or Eunuchs the devotees mutilate themselves. See Sir D. Mackenzie Wallace, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Russia</span></span>. (London [1877]), p. 302. As to collective suicide, see above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg043">43</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_530" id="note_530" name="note_530">530.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg191">191</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_531" id="note_531" name="note_531">531.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Father Picarda, <span class="tei tei-q">“Autour de Mandéra, notes sur l'Ouzigowa, l'Oukwéré et l'Oudoe (Zanguebar),”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xviii. (1886) p. 284.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_532" id="note_532" name="note_532">532.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Strange Adventures of Andrew Battell</span></span> (Hakluyt Society, 1901), pp. 32, 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_533" id="note_533" name="note_533">533.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. de Azara, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages dans l'Amérique Méridionale</span></span> (Paris, 1809), ii. 115-117. The writer affirms that the custom was universally established among all the women of the Mbaya nation, as well as among the women of other Indian nations.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_534" id="note_534" name="note_534">534.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Southey, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">History of Brazil</span></span>, iii. (London, 1819) p. 385.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_535" id="note_535" name="note_535">535.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Barbrooke Grubb, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">An Unknown People in an Unknown Land</span></span> (London, 1911), p. 233.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_536" id="note_536" name="note_536">536.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hugh Goldie, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calabar and its Mission</span></span>, new edition with additional chapters by the Rev. John Taylor Dean (Edinburgh and London, 1901), pp. 34 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The preface to the original edition of this work is dated 1890. By this time the tribal suicide is probably complete.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_537" id="note_537" name="note_537">537.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg021">21</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg023">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg026">26</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_538" id="note_538" name="note_538">538.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 410 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_539" id="note_539" name="note_539">539.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von Rosenberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen van het Batav. Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</span></span>, xxx. (1863) p. 85; H. von Rosenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Der Malayische Archipel</span></span>, p. 160; L. N. H. A. Chatelin, <span class="tei tei-q">“Godsdienst en bijgeloof der Niassers,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xxvi. (1880) pp. 142 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; H. Sundermann, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</span></span>, xi. (1884) p. 445; E. Modigliani, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Viaggio a Nías</span></span>, pp. 277, 479 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Isola delle Donne</span></span> (Milan, 1894), p. 195.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_540" id="note_540" name="note_540">540.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Wilkes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</span></span> (London, 1845), iv. 453; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnography and Philology</span></span>, by H. Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), p. 203.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_541" id="note_541" name="note_541">541.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Brasseur de Bourbourg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l'Amérique-Centrale</span></span>, ii. 574.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_542" id="note_542" name="note_542">542.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">D. G. Brinton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Myths of the New World</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> (New York, 1876), pp. 270 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_543" id="note_543" name="note_543">543.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relations des Jésuites</span></span>, 1636, p. 130 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_544" id="note_544" name="note_544">544.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Bastian, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Voelker des oestlichen Asien</span></span>, iv. 386.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_545" id="note_545" name="note_545">545.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> iv. 685; Cicero, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">In Verr.</span></span> ii. 5. 45; K. F. Hermann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lehrbuch der griechischen Privatalterthümer</span></span>, ed. H. Blümner, p. 362, note <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">1</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_546" id="note_546" name="note_546">546.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Harland and T. T. Wilkinson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lancashire Folk-lore</span></span> (London, 1882), pp. 7 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_547" id="note_547" name="note_547">547.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Travels of the Jesuits in Ethiopia</span></span>, collected and historically digested by F. Balthazar Tellez (London, 1710), p. 198.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_548" id="note_548" name="note_548">548.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ph. Paulitschke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</span></span> (Berlin, 1896), p. 28.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_549" id="note_549" name="note_549">549.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This account I received from my friend the Rev. J. Roscoe in a letter dated Mengo, Uganda, April 27, 1900. See his <span class="tei tei-q">“Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) pp. 42, 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, where, however, the account is in some points not quite so explicit.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_550" id="note_550" name="note_550">550.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Dos Santos, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eastern Ethiopia,”</span> in G. McCall Theal's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Records of South-eastern Africa</span></span>, vii. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_551" id="note_551" name="note_551">551.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg035">35</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_552" id="note_552" name="note_552">552.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 423 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_553" id="note_553" name="note_553">553.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 362 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_554" id="note_554" name="note_554">554.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Grandidier, <span class="tei tei-q">“Madagascar,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bull. de la Société de Géographie</span></span> (Paris), VIème Série, iii. (1872) pp. 402 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_555" id="note_555" name="note_555">555.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Nicolaus Damascenus, quoted by Stobaeus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Florilegium</span></span>, cxxiii. 12 (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</span></span>, ed. C. Müller, iii. 463). The Issedones of Scythia used to gild the skulls of their dead fathers and offer great sacrifices to them annually (Herodotus, iv. 26); they also used the skulls as drinking-cups (Mela, ii. 1. 9). The Boii of Cisalpine Gaul cut off the head of a Roman general whom they had defeated, and having gilded the scalp they used it as a sacred vessel for the pouring of libations, and the priests drank out of it (Livy, xxiii. 24. 12).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_556" id="note_556" name="note_556">556.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Uganda Protectorate</span></span> (London, 1902), ii. 828.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_557" id="note_557" name="note_557">557.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Missionary Holley, <span class="tei tei-q">“Étude sur les Egbas,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xiii. (1881) p. 353. The writer speaks of <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">le roi d'Alakei</span></span>,”</span> but this is probably a mistake or a misprint. As to the Alake or king of Abeokuta, see Sir William Macgregor, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lagos, Abeokuta, and the Alake,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the African Society</span></span>, No. xii. (July, 1904) pp. 471 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Some years ago the Alake visited England and I had the honour of being presented to his Majesty by Sir William Macgregor at Cambridge.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_558" id="note_558" name="note_558">558.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. T. Valdez, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Six Years of a Traveller's Life in Western Africa</span></span>, ii. 161 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_559" id="note_559" name="note_559">559.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Missionary Holley, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, liv. (1882) p. 87. The <span class="tei tei-q">“King of Ake”</span> mentioned by the writer is the Alake or king of Abeokuta; for Ake is the principal quarter of Abeokuta, and Alake means <span class="tei tei-q">“Lord of Ake.”</span> See Sir William Macgregor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_560" id="note_560" name="note_560">560.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Extracted from a letter of Mr. Harold G. Parsons, dated Lagos, September 28th, 1903, and addressed to Mr. Theodore A. Cooke of 54 Oakley Street, Chelsea, London, who was so kind as to send me the letter with leave to make use of it. <span class="tei tei-q">“It is usual for great chiefs to report or announce their succession to the Oni of Ife, or to the Alafin of Oyo, the intimation being accompanied by a present”</span> (Sir W. Macgregor, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_561" id="note_561" name="note_561">561.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg023">23</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg026">26</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> Dr. E. Westermarck has suggested as an alternative to the theory in the text, <span class="tei tei-q">“that the new king is supposed to inherit, not the predecessor's soul, but his divinity or holiness, which is looked upon in the light of a mysterious entity, temporarily seated in the ruling sovereign, but separable from him and transferable to another individual.”</span> See his article, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Killing of the Divine King,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Man</span></span>, viii. (1908) pp. 22-24. There is a good deal to be said in favour of Dr. Westermarck's theory, which is supported in particular by the sanctity attributed to the regalia. But on the whole I see no sufficient reason to abandon the view adopted in the text, and I am confirmed in it by the Shilluk evidence, which was unknown to Dr. Westermarck when he propounded his theory.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_562" id="note_562" name="note_562">562.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 1 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ii. 378 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_563" id="note_563" name="note_563">563.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg021">21</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg027">27</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_564" id="note_564" name="note_564">564.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg047">47</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_565" id="note_565" name="note_565">565.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span> (Munich, 1848-1855), i. 235 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span> (Berlin, 1875), pp. 320 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In some villages of Lower Bavaria one of the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pfingstl's</span></span> comrades carries <span class="tei tei-q">“the May,”</span> which is a young birch-tree wreathed and decorated. Another name for this Whitsuntide masker, both in Lower and Upper Bavaria, is the Water-bird. Sometimes he carries a straw effigy of a monstrous bird with a long neck and a wooden beak, which is thrown into the water instead of the bearer. The wooden beak is afterwards nailed to the ridge of a barn, which it is supposed to protect against lightning and fire for a whole year, till the next <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Pfingstl</span></span> makes his appearance. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, i. 375 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 1003 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In Silesia the Whitsuntide mummer, called the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Rauchfiess</span></span> or <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Raupfiess</span></span>, sometimes stands in a leafy arbour, which is mounted on a cart and drawn about the village by four or six lads. They collect gifts at the houses and finally throw the cart and the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Rauchfiess</span></span> into a shallow pool outside the village. This is called <span class="tei tei-q">“driving out the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Rauchfiess</span></span>.”</span> The custom used to be associated with the driving out of the cattle at Whitsuntide to pasture on the dewy grass, which was thought to make the cows yield plenty of milk. The herdsman who was the last to drive out his beasts on the morning of the day became the <span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Rauchfiess</span></span> in the afternoon. See P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span>, i. (Leipsic, 1903), pp. 117-123.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_566" id="note_566" name="note_566">566.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span> (Stuttgart, 1852), pp. 409-419; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 349 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_567" id="note_567" name="note_567">567.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Sommer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</span></span> (Halle, 1846), pp. 154 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 335 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_568" id="note_568" name="note_568">568.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 336.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_569" id="note_569" name="note_569">569.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span> (Prague, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>, preface dated 1861), p. 61; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 336 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_570" id="note_570" name="note_570">570.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, p. 263; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 343.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_571" id="note_571" name="note_571">571.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, pp. 269 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_572" id="note_572" name="note_572">572.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_573" id="note_573" name="note_573">573.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, pp. 264 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 353 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_574" id="note_574" name="note_574">574.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_575" id="note_575" name="note_575">575.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg208">208</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg210">210</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_576" id="note_576" name="note_576">576.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 247 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, 272 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_577" id="note_577" name="note_577">577.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg208">208</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_578" id="note_578" name="note_578">578.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ovid, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fasti</span></span>, iii. 271.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_579" id="note_579" name="note_579">579.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 308 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_580" id="note_580" name="note_580">580.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 20.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_581" id="note_581" name="note_581">581.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Caesar, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bell. Gall.</span></span> vi. 16; Adam of Bremen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptio Insularum Aquilonis</span></span>, 27 (Migne's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Patrologia Latina</span></span>, cxlvi. col. 644); Olaus Magnus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De gentium septrionalium variis conditionibus</span></span>, iii. 7; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> i. 35 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; F. J. Mone, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Geschichte des nordischen Heidenthums</span></span>, i. 69, 119, 120, 149, 187 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_582" id="note_582" name="note_582">582.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. J. Tendeloo, <span class="tei tei-q">“Verklaring van het zoogenaamd Oud-Alfoersch Teekenschrift,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xxxvi. (1892) pp. 338 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_583" id="note_583" name="note_583">583.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sir H. Johnston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Uganda Protectorate</span></span> (London, 1902), ii. 719 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The writer describes the ceremony from the testimony of an eye-witness.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_584" id="note_584" name="note_584">584.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. Bourke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Snake Dance of the Moquis of Arizona</span></span>, pp. 196 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_585" id="note_585" name="note_585">585.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Euripides, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iphigenia in Taur.</span></span> 1458 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_586" id="note_586" name="note_586">586.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Nieuwenhuisen en H. C. B. von Rosenberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandelingen van het Batav. Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</span></span>, xxx. (1863) p. 43; E. Modigliani, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Un Viaggio a Nias</span></span> (Milan, 1890), pp. 282 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_587" id="note_587" name="note_587">587.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. A. Dubois, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mæurs, institutions et cérémonies des peuples de l'Inde</span></span> (Paris, 1825), i. 151 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_588" id="note_588" name="note_588">588.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1909), iv. 437, quoting Mr. A. R. Loftus-Tottenham.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_589" id="note_589" name="note_589">589.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Turner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Samoa</span></span>, pp. 31 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; compare pp. 38, 58, 59, 69 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 72.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_590" id="note_590" name="note_590">590.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Porphyry, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De abstinentia</span></span>, ii. 55, citing Manetho as his authority.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_591" id="note_591" name="note_591">591.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-q">“The Rudhirádhyáyă, or sanguinary chapter,”</span> translated from the <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Calica Puran</span></span> by W. C. Blaquiere, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Asiatick Researches</span></span>, v. 376 (8vo ed., London, 1807).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_592" id="note_592" name="note_592">592.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</span></span> (Calcutta, 1872), p. 281.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_593" id="note_593" name="note_593">593.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 258 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_594" id="note_594" name="note_594">594.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Mgr. Bruguière, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de l'Association de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, v. (1831) p. 201.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_595" id="note_595" name="note_595">595.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. C. A. J. van Dinter, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eenige geographische en ethnographische aanteekeningen betreffende het eiland Siaoe,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xli. (1899) p. 379.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_596" id="note_596" name="note_596">596.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Hose and W. McDougall, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xxxi. (1901) p. 208.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_597" id="note_597" name="note_597">597.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. G. Aston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Shinto</span></span> (London, 1905). pp. 56 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_598" id="note_598" name="note_598">598.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. C. Kruijt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xliv. (1900) p. 222.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_599" id="note_599" name="note_599">599.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-q">“Deformity and Mutilation,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Madras Government Museum, Bulletin</span></span>, vol. iv. No. 3 (Madras, 1903), pp. 193-196. As to the custom of sacrificing joints of fingers, see my note on Pausanias, viii. 34. 2, vol. iv. pp. 354 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span> To the evidence there adduced add P. J. de Smet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Western Missions and Missionaries</span></span> (New York, 1863), p. 135; G. B. Grinnell, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Blackfoot Lodge Tales</span></span>, pp. 194, 258; A. d'Orbigny, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">L'Homme américain</span></span>, ii. 24; J. Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands</span></span>, pp. 470 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; J. Mathew, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Eaglehawk and Crow</span></span> (London and Melbourne, 1899), p. 120; A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, pp. 746 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; L. Degrandpré, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage à la côte occidentale d'Afrique</span></span> (Paris, 1801), ii. 93 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Dudley Kidd, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Essential Kaffir</span></span>, pp. 203, 262 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; G. W. Stow, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Races of South Africa</span></span> (London, 1905), pp. 129, 152; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</span></span>, Nouvelle Édition, ix. 369, xii. 371; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</span></span>, xiii. (1841) p. 20; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, xiv. (1842) pp. 68, 192; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, xvii. (1845) pp. 12, 13; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, xviii. (1846) p. 6; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, xxiii. (1851) p. 314; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, xxxii. (1860) pp. 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xxiv. (1895) p. 303; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Missions Catholiques</span></span>, xxix. (1897) p. 90; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</span></span>, xxxii. (1900) p. 81. The objects of this mutilation were various. In ancient Athens it was customary to cut off the hand of a suicide and bury it apart from his body (Aeschines, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Contra Ctesiph.</span></span> § 244, p. 193, ed. F. Franke), perhaps to prevent his ghost from attacking the living.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_600" id="note_600" name="note_600">600.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Basil C. Thomson, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Savage Island</span></span> (London, 1902), pp. 92 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_601" id="note_601" name="note_601">601.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Thurston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</span></span> (Madras, 1906), p. 390.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_602" id="note_602" name="note_602">602.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 645; K. Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span>, ii. 58; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, pp. 86 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das festliche Jahr</span></span>, pp. 77 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, iii. 958 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Sepp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion der alten Deutschen</span></span> (Munich, 1890), pp. 67 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmutz, 1893), pp. 258, 353. The fourth Sunday in Lent is also known as Mid-Lent, because it falls in the middle of Lent, or as <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Laetare</span></span> from the first word of the liturgy for that day. In the Roman calendar it is the Sunday of the Rose (<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Domenica rosae</span></span>), because on that day the Pope consecrates a golden rose, which he presents to some royal lady. In one German village of Transylvania the Carrying out of Death takes place on Ascension Day. See below, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg248">248</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_603" id="note_603" name="note_603">603.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Targioni-Tozzetti, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Saggio di novelline, canti ed usanze popolari della Ciociaria</span></span> (Palermo, 1891), pp. 89-95. At Palermo an effigy of the Carnival (<span class="tei tei-foreign"><span style="font-style: italic">Nannu</span></span>) was burnt at midnight on Shrove Tuesday 1878. See G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</span></span>, i. 117-119; G. Trede, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Heidentum in der römischen Kirche</span></span>, iii. 11, note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_604" id="note_604" name="note_604">604.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Nino, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e costumi abruzzesi</span></span>, ii. 198-200. The writer omits to mention the date of these celebrations. No doubt it is either Shrove Tuesday or Ash Wednesday. Compare G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, usi e costumi abruzzesi</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), p. 111. In some parts of Piedmont an effigy of Carnival is burnt on the evening of Shrove Tuesday; in others they set fire to tall poplar trees, which, stript of their branches and surmounted by banners, have been set up the day before in public places. These trees go by the name of <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="it" xml:lang="it"><span style="font-style: italic">Scarli</span></span>. See G. di Giovanni, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi, credenze e pregiudizi del Canavese</span></span> (Palermo, 1889), pp. 161, 164 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> For other accounts of the ceremony of the death of the Carnival, represented either by a puppet or a living person, in Italy and Sicily, see G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</span></span>, i. 96-100; G. Amalfi, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tradizioni ed usi nella Penisola Sorrentina</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), pp. 40, 42. It has been rightly observed by Pitrè (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 96), that the personification of the Carnival is doubtless the lineal descendant of some mythical personage of remote Greek and Roman antiquity.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_605" id="note_605" name="note_605">605.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Wünsch, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Frühlingsfest der Insel Malta</span></span> (Leipsic, 1902), pp. 29 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, quoting Ciantar's supplements to Abelas's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Malta illustrata</span></span>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_606" id="note_606" name="note_606">606.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. S. Campion, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">On Foot in Spain</span></span> (London, 1879), pp. 291-295.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_607" id="note_607" name="note_607">607.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de France</span></span> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), pp. 37 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The name Caramantran is thought to be compounded of <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="fr" xml:lang="fr"><span style="font-style: italic">carême entrant</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lent entering.”</span> It is said that the effigy of Caramantran is sometimes burnt (E. Cortet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Essai sur les fêtes religieuses</span></span>, Paris, 1867, p. 107).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_608" id="note_608" name="note_608">608.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. Pineau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore du Poitou</span></span> (Paris, 1892), p. 493.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_609" id="note_609" name="note_609">609.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Meyrac, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Traditions, légendes et contes des Ardennes</span></span> (Charleville, 1890), p. 63. According to the writer, the custom of burning an effigy of Shrove Tuesday or the Carnival is pretty general in France.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_610" id="note_610" name="note_610">610.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Beauquier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Mois en Franche-Comté</span></span> (Paris, 1900), p. 30. In Beauce and Perche the burning or burial of Shrove Tuesday used to be represented in effigy, but the custom has now disappeared. See F. Chapiseau, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</span></span> (Paris, 1902), i. 320 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_611" id="note_611" name="note_611">611.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Lecœur, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Esquisses du Bocage Normand</span></span> (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1883-1887), ii. 148-150.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_612" id="note_612" name="note_612">612.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Madame Octave Feuillet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Quelques années de ma vie</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (Paris, 1895), pp. 59-61.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_613" id="note_613" name="note_613">613.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes populaires de la Haute-Bretagne</span></span> (Paris, 1886), pp. 227 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_614" id="note_614" name="note_614">614.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Nore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Coutumes, mythes et traditions des Provinces de France</span></span>, p. 206.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_615" id="note_615" name="note_615">615.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Folk-lore de France</span></span>, ii. (Paris, 1905) p. 170.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_616" id="note_616" name="note_616">616.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Sébillot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_617" id="note_617" name="note_617">617.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. L. M. Nogues, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Les Mœurs d'autrefois en Saintonge et en Aunis</span></span> (Saintes, 1891), p. 60. As to the trial and condemnation of the Carnival on Ash Wednesday in France, see further Bérenger-Féraud, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Superstitions et survivances</span></span>, iv. 52 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_618" id="note_618" name="note_618">618.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">British Popular Customs</span></span> (London, 1876), p. 93.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_619" id="note_619" name="note_619">619.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg209">209</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_620" id="note_620" name="note_620">620.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span>, p. 371.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_621" id="note_621" name="note_621">621.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Haltrich, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</span></span> (Vienna, 1885), pp. 284 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_622" id="note_622" name="note_622">622.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">K. von Leoprechting, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem Lechrain</span></span>, pp. 162 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 411.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_623" id="note_623" name="note_623">623.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</span></span>, p. 374; compare A. Birlinger, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</span></span> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861-1862), ii. pp. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, § 71.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_624" id="note_624" name="note_624">624.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 372.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_625" id="note_625" name="note_625">625.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 373.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_626" id="note_626" name="note_626">626.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 373, 374.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_627" id="note_627" name="note_627">627.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Kuhn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</span></span> (Leipsic, 1859), ii. p. 130, § 393.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_628" id="note_628" name="note_628">628.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, vi. (1895) p. 206.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_629" id="note_629" name="note_629">629.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. J. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</span></span> (St. Petersburg, 1876), p. 353.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_630" id="note_630" name="note_630">630.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Meier, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 374.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_631" id="note_631" name="note_631">631.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Pröhle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Harzbilder</span></span> (Leipsic, 1855), p. 54.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_632" id="note_632" name="note_632">632.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, iii. 958.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_633" id="note_633" name="note_633">633.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Boemus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Omnium gentium mores, leges, et ritus</span></span> (Paris, 1538), p. 83.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_634" id="note_634" name="note_634">634.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, iii. 958.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_635" id="note_635" name="note_635">635.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 639 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 412.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_636" id="note_636" name="note_636">636.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sepp, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion der alten Deutschen</span></span> (Munich, 1876), p. 67.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_637" id="note_637" name="note_637">637.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Kauffmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder</span></span> (Strasburg, 1902), p. 283.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_638" id="note_638" name="note_638">638.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Aug. Witzschel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</span></span> (Vienna, 1878), p. 193.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_639" id="note_639" name="note_639">639.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Witzschel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 199; J. A. E. Köhler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</span></span> (Leipsic, 1867), pp. 171 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_640" id="note_640" name="note_640">640.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Kauffmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder</span></span> (Strasburg, 1902), p. 283 note, quoting J. K. Zeumer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Laetare vulgo Todten Sonntag</span></span> (Jena, 1701), pp. 20 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 640 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The words of the song are given as <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">So treiben wir den todten auss</span></span>,”</span> but this must be a mistake for <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="de" xml:lang="de"><span style="font-style: italic">So treiben wir den Tod hinaus</span></span>,”</span> as the line is given by P. Drechsler (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span>, i. 66). In the passage quoted the effigy is spoken of as <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">mortis larva</span></span>.”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_641" id="note_641" name="note_641">641.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Zacharias Schneider, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Leipziger Chronik</span></span>, iv. 143, cited by K. Schwenk, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Mythologie der Slaven</span></span> (Frankfort, 1853), pp. 217 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, and Fr. Kauffmann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Balder</span></span>, pp. 284 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_642" id="note_642" name="note_642">642.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span>, i. 65-71. Compare A. Peter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</span></span> (Troppau, 1865-1867), ii. 281 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_643" id="note_643" name="note_643">643.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. Tetzner, <span class="tei tei-q">“Die Tschechen und Mährer in Schlesien,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lxxviii. (1900) p. 340.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_644" id="note_644" name="note_644">644.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 642.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_645" id="note_645" name="note_645">645.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, pp. 90 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_646" id="note_646" name="note_646">646.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> p. 91.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_647" id="note_647" name="note_647">647.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), pp. 353-355.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_648" id="note_648" name="note_648">648.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 644; K. Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span> (Leipsic, 1862-1863), ii. 55; P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Branch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span>, i. 70 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_649" id="note_649" name="note_649">649.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 640, 643; P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> i. 70. See also above, p. 236.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_650" id="note_650" name="note_650">650.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Th. Vernaleken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</span></span> (Vienna, 1859), pp. 294 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, p. 90.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_651" id="note_651" name="note_651">651.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg236">236</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_652" id="note_652" name="note_652">652.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg234">234</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg235">235</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg236">236</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg237">237</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_653" id="note_653" name="note_653">653.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das festliche Jahr</span></span> (Leipsic, 1863), p. 80.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_654" id="note_654" name="note_654">654.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span> (London, 1872), p. 211.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_655" id="note_655" name="note_655">655.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ibid.</span></span> p. 210.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_656" id="note_656" name="note_656">656.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 652; H. Usener, "Italische Mythen," <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rheinisches Museum</span></span>, N.F., xxx. (1875) pp. 191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_657" id="note_657" name="note_657">657.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Pitrè, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Spettacoli e feste popolari siciliane</span></span> (Palermo, 1881), pp. 207 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="it" xml:lang="it"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</span></span>, i. 107 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_658" id="note_658" name="note_658">658.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni popolari</span></span>, iv. (1885) pp. 294 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_659" id="note_659" name="note_659">659.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 193.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_660" id="note_660" name="note_660">660.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Vincenzo Dorsa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Tradizione greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze popolari della Calabria citeriore</span></span> (Cosenza, 1884), pp. 43 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_661" id="note_661" name="note_661">661.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Martinengo-Cesaresco, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Academy</span></span>, No. 671, March 14, 1885, p. 188.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_662" id="note_662" name="note_662">662.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Laisnel de la Salle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Croyances et légendes du centre de la France</span></span> (Paris, 1875), i. 43 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_663" id="note_663" name="note_663">663.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 652; H. Usener, <span class="tei tei-q">“Italische Mythen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rheinisches Museum</span></span>, N.F., xxx. (1875) pp. 191 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_664" id="note_664" name="note_664">664.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Hoffmann-Krayer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Fruchtbarkeitsriten im schweizerischen Volksbrauch,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schweizerisches Archiv für Volkskunde</span></span>, xi. (1903) p. 239.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_665" id="note_665" name="note_665">665.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. von Wlislocki, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigeuner</span></span> (Münster i. W., 1891), pp. 145 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_666" id="note_666" name="note_666">666.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Cortet, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Essai sur les fêtes religieuses</span></span> (Paris, 1867), pp. 107 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Laisnel de la Salle, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Croyances et légendes du centre de la France</span></span>, i. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A similar custom appears to be observed in Minorca. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Globus</span></span>, lix. (1891) pp. 279, 280.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_667" id="note_667" name="note_667">667.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. de Nino, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Usi e costumi abruzzesi</span></span>, ii. 203-205 (Florence, 1881); G. Finamore, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Credenze, usi e costumi abruzzesi</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), pp. 112, 114.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_668" id="note_668" name="note_668">668.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. Amalfi, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tradizioni ed usi nella Penisola Sorrentina</span></span> (Palermo, 1890), p. 41.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_669" id="note_669" name="note_669">669.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lucy E. Broadwood, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, iv. (1893) p. 390.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_670" id="note_670" name="note_670">670.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, pp. 89 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 156. This custom has been already referred to. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_671" id="note_671" name="note_671">671.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span>, i. 71 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das festliche Jahr</span></span>, p. 82; Philo vom Walde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schlesien in Sage und Brauch</span></span> (Berlin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">n.d.</span></span>, preface dated 1883), p. 122.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_672" id="note_672" name="note_672">672.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">A. Witzschel, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</span></span>, pp. 192 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; compare pp. 297 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_673" id="note_673" name="note_673">673.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 643 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; K. Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sagenbuch der Lausitz</span></span>, ii. 54 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 412 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span>, p. 211.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_674" id="note_674" name="note_674">674.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 644; K. Haupt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> ii. 55.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_675" id="note_675" name="note_675">675.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. K. Schuller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das Todaustragen und der Muorlef, ein Beitrag zur Kunde sächsischer Sitte und Sage in Siebenbürgen</span></span> (Hermannstadt, 1861), pp. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> The description of this ceremony by Miss E. Gerard (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land beyond the Forest</span></span>, ii. 47-49) is plainly borrowed from Mr. Schuller's little work.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_676" id="note_676" name="note_676">676.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span> (Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), pp. 258 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_677" id="note_677" name="note_677">677.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">P. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg247">247</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_678" id="note_678" name="note_678">678.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">This is also the view taken of the custom by W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 419.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_679" id="note_679" name="note_679">679.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Th. Vernaleken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</span></span>, pp. 293 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_680" id="note_680" name="note_680">680.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Das festliche Jahr</span></span>, p. 82.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_681" id="note_681" name="note_681">681.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Philo vom Walde, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schlesien in Sage und Brauch</span></span>, p. 122; P. Drechsler, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</span></span>, i. 74.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_682" id="note_682" name="note_682">682.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg236">236</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_683" id="note_683" name="note_683">683.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg239">239</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_684" id="note_684" name="note_684">684.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg236">236</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_685" id="note_685" name="note_685">685.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg246">246</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_686" id="note_686" name="note_686">686.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg246">246</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_687" id="note_687" name="note_687">687.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 73 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_688" id="note_688" name="note_688">688.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg246">246</a>, and J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 644; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, pp. 87 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_689" id="note_689" name="note_689">689.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg246">246</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_690" id="note_690" name="note_690">690.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg250">250</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_691" id="note_691" name="note_691">691.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_692" id="note_692" name="note_692">692.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg234">234</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg235">235</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg240">240</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg248">248</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg250">250</a>; and J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 643.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_693" id="note_693" name="note_693">693.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</span></span>, p. 88. Sometimes the effigy of Death (without a tree) is carried round by boys who collect gratuities (J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 644).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_694" id="note_694" name="note_694">694.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg208">208</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_695" id="note_695" name="note_695">695.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg231">231</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_696" id="note_696" name="note_696">696.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">F. J. Wiedemann, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</span></span>, p. 353; Holzmayer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Osiliana,”</span> in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</span></span>, vii. Heft 2, pp. 10 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 407 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_697" id="note_697" name="note_697">697.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 417-421.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_698" id="note_698" name="note_698">698.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Olaus Magnus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">De gentium septentrionalium variis conditionibus</span></span>, xv. 8 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Le Temps</span></span>, No. 15,669, May 11, 1902, p. 2, there is a description of this ceremony as it used to be performed in Stockholm. The description seems to be borrowed from Olaus Magnus.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_699" id="note_699" name="note_699">699.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 637-639; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, iv. 2, pp. 357 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> See also E. Krause, <span class="tei tei-q">“Das Sommertags-Fest in Heidelberg,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</span></span>, 1895, p. (145); A. Dieterich, <span class="tei tei-q">“Sommertag,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</span></span>, viii. (1905) Beiheft, pp. 82 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_700" id="note_700" name="note_700">700.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, i. 369 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_701" id="note_701" name="note_701">701.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</span></span>, ii. 259 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; F. Panzer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</span></span>, i. pp. 253-256; K. von Leoprechting, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aus dem Lechrain</span></span>, pp. 167 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> A dialogue in verse between representatives of Winter and Summer is spoken at Hartlieb in Silesia, near Breslau. See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Zeitschrift des Vereins für Volkskunde</span></span>, iii. (1893) pp. 226-228.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_702" id="note_702" name="note_702">702.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Th. Vernaleken, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythen und Bräuche des Völkes in Österreich</span></span>, pp. 297 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_703" id="note_703" name="note_703">703.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. Andree, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Braunschweiger Volkskunde</span></span> (Brunswick, 1896), p. 250.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_704" id="note_704" name="note_704">704.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</span></span>, pp. 430-436.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_705" id="note_705" name="note_705">705.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Müller, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 259.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_706" id="note_706" name="note_706">706.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Train, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Historical and Statistical Account of the Isle of Man</span></span> (Douglas, Isle of Man, 1845), ii. 118-120. It has been suggested that the name Maceboard may be a corruption of May-sports.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_707" id="note_707" name="note_707">707.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Fr. Boas, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Central Eskimo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</span></span> (Washington, 1888), p. 605. The account of this custom given by Captain J. S. Mutch is as follows: <span class="tei tei-q">“The people take a long rope, the ends of which are tied together. They arrange themselves so that those born during the summer stand close to the water, and those born in the winter stand inland; and then they pull at the rope to see whether summer or winter is the stronger. If winter should win, there will be plenty of food; if summer should win, there will be a bad winter.”</span> See Fr. Boas, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</span></span>, xv. (1901) pp. 140 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> At Memphis in Egypt there were two statues in front of the temple of Hephaestus (Ptah), of which the more northern was popularly called Summer and the more southern Winter. The people worshipped the image of Summer and execrated the image of Winter. It has been suggested that the two statues represented Osiris and Typhon, the good and the bad god. See Herodotus, ii. 121, with the notes of Bähr and Wiedemann.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_708" id="note_708" name="note_708">708.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Relations des Jésuites</span></span>, 1636, p. 38 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_709" id="note_709" name="note_709">709.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. Herzog, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schweizerische Volksfeste, Sitten und Gebräuche</span></span> (Aurau, 1884), pp. 164-166; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 498 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_710" id="note_710" name="note_710">710.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Letter to me of Dr. J. S. Black, dated Lauriston Cottage, Wimbledon Common, 28th May, 1903. In a subsequent letter (dated 9th June, 1903) Dr. Black enclosed some bibliographical references to the custom which were kindly furnished to him by Professor P. Schmiedel of Zurich, who speaks of the effigy as a representative of Winter. It is not expressly so called by H. Herzog and W. Mannhardt. See the preceding note.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_711" id="note_711" name="note_711">711.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span>, p. 221.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_712" id="note_712" name="note_712">712.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Songs of the Russian People</span></span>, p. 241.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_713" id="note_713" name="note_713">713.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> pp. 243 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 414.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_714" id="note_714" name="note_714">714.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, pp. 414 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 244.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_715" id="note_715" name="note_715">715.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 245; W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Baumkultus</span></span>, p. 416.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_716" id="note_716" name="note_716">716.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. Mannhardt, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span>; W. R. S. Ralston, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">l.c.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_717" id="note_717" name="note_717">717.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Grimm, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Deutsche Mythologie</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">4</span></span> ii. 644.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_718" id="note_718" name="note_718">718.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. von Hahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Albanesische Studien</span></span> (Jena, 1854), i. 160.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_719" id="note_719" name="note_719">719.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">R. C. Temple, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Indian Antiquary</span></span>, xi. (1882) pp. 297 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_720" id="note_720" name="note_720">720.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 84 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_721" id="note_721" name="note_721">721.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, ii. 45 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_722" id="note_722" name="note_722">722.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">When the Kurnai of Victoria saw the Aurora Australis, which corresponds to the Northern Streamers of Europe, they exchanged wives for the day and swung the severed hand of a dead man towards it, shouting, <span class="tei tei-q">“Send it away! do not let it burn us up!”</span> See A. W. Howitt, <span class="tei tei-q">“On some Australian Beliefs,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</span></span>, xiii. (1884) p. 189; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</span></span>, pp. 276 sq., 430.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_723" id="note_723" name="note_723">723.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 242 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_724" id="note_724" name="note_724">724.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 4 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>, 170.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_725" id="note_725" name="note_725">725.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">op. cit.</span></span> p. 170. For a description of some of these ceremonies see <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</span></span>, i. 85 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_726" id="note_726" name="note_726">726.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Lord Avebury, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Origin of Civilisation</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> pp. 378 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; compare <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Prehistoric Times</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> p. 561.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_727" id="note_727" name="note_727">727.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">De Guignes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages à Peking, Manille et l'Île de France</span></span>, iii. (Paris, 1808) pp. 114 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_728" id="note_728" name="note_728">728.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Above, pp. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg156">156</a> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_729" id="note_729" name="note_729">729.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">B. F. Matthes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Einige Eigenthumlichkeiten in den Festen und Gewohnheiten der Makassaren und Buginesen</span></span> (Leyden, 1884), p. 1; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-q">“Over de âdá's of gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegineezen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</span></span>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Derde Reeks, Tweede Deel (Amsterdam, 1885), pp. 169 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_730" id="note_730" name="note_730">730.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. A. Oldfield, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Sketches from Nipal</span></span> (London, 1880), ii. 351.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_731" id="note_731" name="note_731">731.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spenser St. John, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Life in the Forests of the Far East</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">2</span></span> i. 194 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_732" id="note_732" name="note_732">732.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Ch. Brooke, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Ten Years in Sarawak</span></span>, ii. 226 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_733" id="note_733" name="note_733">733.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. S. G. Gramberg, <span class="tei tei-q">“De Troeboekvisscherij,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xxiv. (1887) pp. 314 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_734" id="note_734" name="note_734">734.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Petitot, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Monographie des Dènè-Dindjiè</span></span> (Paris, 1876), p. 38. The same ceremony is performed, oddly enough, to procure the death of an enemy.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_735" id="note_735" name="note_735">735.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hamilton's <span class="tei tei-q">“Account of the East Indies,”</span> in Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, viii. 360 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span> In general we are merely told that these Indian devotees swing on hooks in fulfilment of a vow or to obtain some favour of a deity. See Duarte Barbosa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in the beginning of the Sixteenth Century</span></span>, translated by the Hon. H. E. J. Stanley (Hakluyt Society, London, 1866), pp. 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Gaspar Balbi's <span class="tei tei-q">“Voyage to Pegu,”</span> in Pinkerton's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyages and Travels</span></span>, ix. 398; Sonnerat, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Voyage aux Indes orientales et à la Chine</span></span>, i. 244; S. Mateer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Land of Charity</span></span>, p. 220; W. W. Hunter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Rural Bengal</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> p. 463; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">North Indian Notes and Queries</span></span>, i. p. 76, § 511.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_736" id="note_736" name="note_736">736.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">V. Ball, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Jungle Life in India</span></span> (London, 1880), p. 232.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_737" id="note_737" name="note_737">737.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. W. Hunter, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Annals of Rural Bengal</span></span><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">5</span></span> (London, 1872), p. 463.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_738" id="note_738" name="note_738">738.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">G. W. Leitner, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Languages and Races of Dardistan</span></span> (Lahore, 1878), p. 12.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_739" id="note_739" name="note_739">739.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Sarat Chandra Mitra, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on two Behari Pastimes,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</span></span>, iii. 95 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_740" id="note_740" name="note_740">740.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">H. H. Wilson, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Religious Festivals of the Hindus,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, ix. (1848) p. 98. Compare E. T. Dalton, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</span></span>, p. 314; Monier Williams, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Religious Life and Thought in India</span></span>, p. 137; W. Crooke, <span class="tei tei-q">“The Legends of Krishna,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Folk-lore</span></span>, xi. (1900) pp. 21 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_741" id="note_741" name="note_741">741.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Hymns of the Rigveda</span></span>, vii. 87. 5 (vol. iii. p. 108 of R. T. H. Griffith's translation, Benares, 1891); H. Oldenberg, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die Religion des Veda</span></span>, pp. 444 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_742" id="note_742" name="note_742">742.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. G. Kohl, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</span></span> (Dresden and Leipsic, 1841), ii. 268 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_743" id="note_743" name="note_743">743.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">L. v. Schroeder, <span class="tei tei-q">“Lihgo (Refrain der lettischen Sonnwendlieder),”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mitteilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</span></span>, xxxii. (1902) pp. 1-11.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_744" id="note_744" name="note_744">744.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">S. W. Tromp, <span class="tei tei-q">“Uit de Salasila van Koetei,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</span></span>, xxxvii. (1888) pp. 87-89.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_745" id="note_745" name="note_745">745.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. Perham, <span class="tei tei-q">“Manangism in Borneo,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</span></span>, No. 19 (Singapore, 1887), pp. 97 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; E. H. Gomes, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Seventeen Years among the Sea Dyaks of Borneo</span></span> (London, 1911), pp. 169, 170, 171; H. Ling Roth, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</span></span>, i. 279.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_746" id="note_746" name="note_746">746.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">C. Bock, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Head-hunters of Borneo</span></span> (London, 1881), pp. 110-112.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_747" id="note_747" name="note_747">747.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Astronomica</span></span>, ii. 4, pp. 34 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>, ed. Bunte; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fabulae</span></span>, 130; Servius and Probus on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> ii. 389; Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Oscillantes,”</span> p. 194, ed. C. O. Müller; Athenaeus, xiv. 10, p. 618 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-variant: small-caps">e f</span></span>; Pollux, iv. 55; Hesychius, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.vv.</span></span> Ἀλῆτις and Αἰώρα; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Etymologicum magnum</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> Αἰώρα, p. 42. 3; Schol. on Homer, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Iliad</span></span>, xxii. 29. The story of the murder of Icarius is told by a scholiast on Lucian (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dial. meretr.</span></span> vii. 4) to explain the origin of a different festival (<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Rheinisches Museum</span></span>, N.F., xxv. (1870) pp. 557 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span>; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Scholia in Lucianum</span></span>, ed. H. Rabe, p. 280). As to the swinging festival at Athens see O. Jahn, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Archäologische Beiträge</span></span>, pp. 324 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span>; Daremberg et Saglio, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines</span></span>, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Aiora”</span>; Miss J. E. Harrison, in <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythology and Monuments of Ancient Athens</span></span>, by Mrs. Verrall and Miss J. E. Harrison, pp. xxxix. <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_748" id="note_748" name="note_748">748.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> xii. 603: <span class="tei tei-q">“<span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">Et Varro ait: Suspendiosis quibus iusta fieri ius non sit, suspensis oscillis veluti per imitationem mortis parentari.</span></span>”</span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_749" id="note_749" name="note_749">749.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Servius on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> ii. 389; <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">id.</span></span>, on <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Aen.</span></span> vi. 741.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_750" id="note_750" name="note_750">750.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Spencer and Gillen, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Native Tribes of Central Australia</span></span>, pp. 505 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_751" id="note_751" name="note_751">751.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Festus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Oscillantes,”</span> p. 194, ed. C. O. Müller. This festival and its origin are also alluded to in a passage of one of the manuscripts of Servius (on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> ii. 389), which is printed by Lion in his edition of Servius (vol. ii. 254, note), but not by Thilo and Hagen in their large critical edition of the old Virgilian commentator. <span class="tei tei-q">“In <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Schol. Bob.</span></span> p. 256 we are told that there was a reminiscence of the fact that, the bodies of Latinus and Aeneas being undiscoverable, their <span class="tei tei-foreign" lang="la" xml:lang="la"><span style="font-style: italic">animae</span></span> were sought in the air”</span> (G. E. M. Marindin, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">s.v.</span></span> <span class="tei tei-q">“Oscilla,”</span> W. Smith's <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</span></span>,<span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="vertical-align: super">3</span></span> ii. 304).</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_752" id="note_752" name="note_752">752.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Hyginus, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Fab.</span></span> 130.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_753" id="note_753" name="note_753">753.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Probus on Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> ii. 385.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_754" id="note_754" name="note_754">754.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Virgil, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Georg.</span></span> ii. 388 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sqq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_755" id="note_755" name="note_755">755.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">See above, p. <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg157">157</a>.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_756" id="note_756" name="note_756">756.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. G. Clark, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Peloponnesus</span></span> (London, 1858), p. 274.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_757" id="note_757" name="note_757">757.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">The Cyclades</span></span> (London, 1885), p. 5.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_758" id="note_758" name="note_758">758.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. T. Bent, quoted by Miss J. E. Harrison, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mythology and Monuments of Ancient Athens</span></span>, p. xliii.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_759" id="note_759" name="note_759">759.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Vincenzo Dorsa, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">La Tradizione greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze popolari della Calabria Citeriore</span></span> (Cosenza, 1884), p. 36. In one village the custom is observed on Ascension Day instead of at Christmas.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_760" id="note_760" name="note_760">760.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Valdés, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Los Majos de Cadiz</span></span>, extract sent to me in the original Spanish by Mr. W. Moss, of 21 Abbey Grove, Bolton, March 23rd, 1907.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_761" id="note_761" name="note_761">761.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">E. Doutté, <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Magie et religion dans l'Afrique du nord</span></span> (Algiers, 1908), pp. 580 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_762" id="note_762" name="note_762">762.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">W. W. Rockhill, <span class="tei tei-q">“Notes on some of the Laws, Customs, and Superstitions of Korea,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">American Anthropologist</span></span>, iv. (1891) pp. 185 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_763" id="note_763" name="note_763">763.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, v. 1. 4.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_764" id="note_764" name="note_764">764.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">Pausanias, vi. 20. 9.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_765" id="note_765" name="note_765">765.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext"><span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Taboo and the Perils of the Soul</span></span>, pp. 88 <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">sq.</span></span></dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_766" id="note_766" name="note_766">766.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. L. van Hasselt, <span class="tei tei-q">“Aanteekeningen aangaande de gewoonten der Papoeas in de Dorebaai, ten opzichte van zwangerschap en geboorte,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</span></span>, xliii. (1901) p. 566.</dd>
						<dt class="tei tei-notelabel">
							<a href="#noteref_767" id="note_767" name="note_767">767.</a>
						</dt>
						<dd class="tei tei-notetext">J. H. Letteboer, <span class="tei tei-q">“Eenige aanteekeningen omtrent de gebruiken bij zwangerschap en geboorte onder de Savuneezen,”</span> <span class="tei tei-hi"><span style="font-style: italic">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</span></span>, xlvi. (1902) p. 45.</dd>
					</dl>
				</div>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
