<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes-1-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Footnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-7-2-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 230.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Excursion de M. Brun-Rollet dans la région supérieure du Nil,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IVme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1852) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 421⁠–⁠423; <i>ib.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1854) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 387 <i>sq.</i>; Brun-Rollet, <i>Le Nil Blanc et le Soudan</i> (Paris, 1855), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 227 <i>sqq.</i> As to the rain-making chiefs of this region see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 345 <i>sqq.</i> As to the distress and privations endured by these people in the dry season, see E. de Pruyssenaere, “Reisen und Forschungen im Gebiete des Weissen und Blauen Nil,” <i>Petermann’s Mittheilungen</i>, <i>Ergänzungsheft</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 50 (Gotha, 1877), <abbr>p.</abbr> 23.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Munzinger, <i>Ostafrikanische Studien</i> (Schaffhausen, 1864), <abbr>p.</abbr> 474.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr. Cuénot, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1841) <abbr>p.</abbr> 143; H. Mouhot, <i>Travels in the Central Parts of Indo-China</i> (London, 1864), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 35; A. Bastian, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Gebirgsstämme in Kambodia,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1866) <abbr>p.</abbr> 37; J. Moura, <i>Le Royaume du Cambodge</i> (Paris, 1883), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 432⁠–⁠436; E. Aymonier, “Notes sur les coutumes et croyances superstitieuses des Cambodgiens,” in <i>Cochinchine Française: Excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 16 (Saigon, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 172 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 60; Le Capitaine Cupet, “Chez les populations sauvages du Sud de l’Annam,” <i>Tour du monde</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1682, April 1, 1893, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193⁠–⁠204; <i>id.</i>, in <i>Mission Pavie, Indo-Chine 1879⁠–⁠1895, Géographie et voyages</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Paris, 1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297⁠–⁠318; Tournier, <i>Notice sur le Laos Français</i> (Hanoi, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 111 <i>sq.</i>; A. Lavallée, “Notes ethnographiques sur diverses tribus du Sud-Est de l’Inde-Chine,” <i>Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Hanoi, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 303 <i>sq.</i> Mgr. Cuénot mentions only the King of Fire. Bastian speaks as if the King of Fire was also the King of Water. Both writers report at second hand.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Caesar, <i>Bell. Gall.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 25.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Julian, Fragm. 4, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Hertlein, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 608 <i>sq.</i> On the vast woods of Germany, their coolness and shade, see also Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Elton, <i>Origins of English History</i> (London, 1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3, 106 <i>sq.</i>, 224.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Helbig, <i>Die Italiker in der Poebene</i> (Leipsic, 1879), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Nissen, <i>Italische Landeskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Berlin, 1883) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 431 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 36⁠–⁠38. The Ciminian mountains (<i>Monte Cimino</i>) are still clothed with dense woods of majestic oaks and chestnuts. Modern writers suppose that Livy has exaggerated the terrors and difficulties of the forest. See G. Dennis, <i>Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 146⁠–⁠149.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <i>Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</i> (Breslau, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 357 <i>sqq.</i> I am told that the dark blue waters of the lake of Pheneus, which still reflected the sombre pine-forests of the surrounding mountains when I travelled in Arcadia in the bright unforgetable autumn days of 1895, have since disappeared, the subterranean chasms which drain this basin having been, whether accidentally or artificially, cleared so as to allow the pent-up waters to escape. The acres which the peasants have thereby added to their fields will hardly console future travellers for the loss of the watery mirror, which was one of the most beautiful, as it was one of the rarest, scenes in the parched land of Greece.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 53 <i>sqq.</i>; O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indo-germanischen Altertumskunde</i> (Strasburg, 1901), <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Tempel,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 855 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 249 <i>sqq.</i>; Maximus Tyrius, <i>Dissert.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Schrader, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 857 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Germania</i>, 9, 39, 40, 43; <i>id.</i>, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 12, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 73; <i>id.</i>, <i>Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 14; J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 541 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>Bavaria Landes- und Volkeskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 929 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 519 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i> (Berlin, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adam of Bremen, <i>Descriptio insularum Aquilonis</i>, 27 (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Latina</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> cxlvi. col. 644).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Leger, <i>La Mythologie slave</i> (Paris, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73⁠–⁠75, 188⁠–⁠190.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mathias Michov, “De Sarmatia Asiana atque Europea,” in Simon Grynaeus’s <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i> (Paris, 1532), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 455 <i>sq.</i> [wrongly numbered 445, 446]; Martin Cromer, <i>De origine et rebus gestis Polonorum</i> (Basel, 1568), <abbr>p.</abbr> 241; Fabricius, <i>Livonicae historiae compendiosa series</i> (<i>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) <abbr>p.</abbr> 441).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See C. Bötticher, <i>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</i> (Berlin, 1856); L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd. Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 105⁠–⁠114.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 331, referring to an inscription found in Cos some years ago.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 77; Tacitus, <i>Ann.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 58. The fig-tree is represented on Roman coins and on the great marble reliefs which stand in the Forum. See E. Babelon, <i>Monnaies de la République romaine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 336 <i>sq.</i>; R. Lanciani, <i>Ruins and Excavations of Ancient Rome</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 258; E. Petersen, <i>Vom alten Rom</i> (Leipsic, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26, 27.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Rhamm, “Der heidnische Gottesdienst des finnischen Stammes,” <i>Globus</i>, lxvii. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 343, 348. This article is an abstract of a Finnish book <i>Suomen suvun pakanillinen jumalen palvelus</i>, by J. Krohn (Helsingfors, 1894).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Heilige Haine und Bäume der Finnen,” <i>Globus</i>, lix. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 350 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr> Pallas, <i>Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen Reichs</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1771⁠–⁠1776), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 60 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Porphyry, <i>De abstinentia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 6. This was an opinion of the Stoic and Peripatetic philosophy.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washington Matthews, <i>Ethnography and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians</i> (Washington, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. H. Morgan, <i>League of the Iroquois</i> (Rochester, 1851), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162, 164.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. L. Krapf, <i>Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours during an Eighteen Years’ Residence in Eastern Africa</i> (London, 1860), <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author dated November 3, 1898.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 349 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Hupe, “Over de godsdienst, zeden enz. der Dajakkers,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1846 (Batavia), dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 158.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De la Loubere, <i>Du royaume de Siam</i> (Amsterdam, 1691), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 382. Compare Mgr. Bruguière, in <i>Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1831) <abbr>p.</abbr> 127.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Buddhist conception of trees as animated often comes out in the <i>Jatakas</i>. For examples see H. Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 259 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>The Jātaka</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 465, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 96 <i>sqq.</i> (English translation edited by E. B. Cowell).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <i>The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (Leyden, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 272 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <i>The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Leyden, 1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 663.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 33.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Ellis, <i>The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i> (London, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49 <i>sqq.</i> Compare <i>id.</i>, <i>The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 34 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1877) <abbr>p.</abbr> 71.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Maspero, <i>Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique: les origines</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 121 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Merolla, “Voyage to Congo,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 236.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. C. von der Decken, <i>Reisen in Ost-Afrika</i> (Leipsic and Heidelberg, 1869⁠–⁠1871), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 216. The writer does not describe the mode of appeasing the tree-spirit in the case mentioned. As to the Wanika beliefs, see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_12">12</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 832.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. L. Durand, <i>Voyage au Sénégal</i> (Paris, 1802), <abbr>p.</abbr> 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. J. Curtiss, <i>Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i> (Chicago, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. d’Orbigny, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i> (Paris and Strasburg, 1839⁠–⁠1843), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 157, 159 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <i>In Centraal-Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1900), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 146.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. H. Romilly, <i>From my Verandah in New Guinea</i> (London, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 86.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. C. J. Ibbetson, <i>Outlines of Panjab Ethnography</i> (Calcutta, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 120.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. von Schulenberg, “Volkskundliche Mittheilungen aus der Mark,” <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i> (1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 189. Compare A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>Nord-deutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 407, § 142; E. Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 463, § 208; A. Kuhn, <i>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 108 <i>sq.</i>, §§ 326, 327, <abbr>p.</abbr> 116, §§ 356, 358; A. Birlinger, <i>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 464 <i>sq.</i>, § 6; K. Bartsch, <i>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 228 <i>sq.</i>; W. Kolbe, <i>Hessische Volks-Sitten und Gebräuche</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 29; R. Andree, <i>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</i> (Brunswick, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 234; R. Wuttke, Sächsische Volkskunde 2nd Ed., (Dresden, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 370. The custom has been discussed by U. Jahn, <i>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</i> (Breslau, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 214⁠–⁠220. He comes to the conclusion, which I cannot but regard as erroneous, that the custom was in origin a rational precaution to keep the caterpillars from the trees. Compare the marriage of trees, below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_24">24</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Aubrey, <i>Remaines of Gentilisme and Judaisme</i> (London, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 247.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Jones, <i>History of the Ojebway Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 104.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <i>Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 274.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Peter, <i>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</i> (Troppau, 1865⁠–⁠67), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 30.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Wagler, <i>Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56 note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 154; compare <i>id.</i>, <i>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 457 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 251 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 42 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. de los Reyes y Florentino, “Die religiosen Anschauungen der Ilocanen (Luzon),” <i>Mittheilungen der k. k. Geograph. Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 556.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Gardner, “Philippine (Tagalog) Superstitions,” <i>Journal of American Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 191. These superstitions are translated from an old and rare work <i>La Pratica del ministerio</i>, by Padre Tomas Ortiz (Manila, 1713).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Nöldeke, “Tigre-Texte,” <i>Zeitschrift für Assyriologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298, referring to E. Littmann, <i>Publications of the Princeton Expedition to Abyssinia</i> (Leyden, 1910).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Spieth, <i>Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 394⁠–⁠396.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Neumann, “De <i>tĕndi</i> in verband met Si Dajang,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xlviii. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 124 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From a letter of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Roscoe, written in Busoga, 21st May, 1908.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, translated by J. Eggeling, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <i>sq.</i> (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>.); H. Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 256 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De la Loubere, <i>Du royaume de Siam</i> (Amsterdam, 1691), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 383.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Turner, <i>Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 63.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Zingerle, “Der heilige Baum bei Nauders,” <i>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1859), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 33 <i>sqq.</i> According to Lucan (<i>Pharsal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 429⁠–⁠431), the soldiers whom Caesar ordered to cut down the sacred oak-grove of the Druids at Marseilles believed that the axes would rebound from the trees and wound themselves.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. W. Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 198 <i>sq.</i> As to the durian-tree and its fruit, see A. R. Wallace, <i>The Malay Archipelago</i> 6th Ed., (London, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 74 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. G. Aston, <i>Shinto</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 165.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 34; A. Strausz, <i>Die Bulgaren</i> (Leipsic, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 352. Compare R. F. Kaindl, “Aus der Volksüberlieferung der Bojken,” <i>Globus</i>, lxxix. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Pitrè, <i>Spettacoli e feste popolari</i> (Palermo, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 221; <i>id.</i>, <i>Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Palermo, 1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 111; G. Vuillier, “Chez les magiciens et les sorciers de la Corrèze,” <i>Tour du monde</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 512.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Tchéraz, “Notes sur la mythologie Arménienne,” <i>Transactions of the Ninth International Congress of Orientalists</i> (London, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 827. Compare M. Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i> (Leipsic, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 60.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Finamore, <i>Credenze, usi, e costumi abruzzesi</i> (Palermo, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Georgeakis et Pineau, <i>Folk-lore de Lesbos</i> (Paris, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 354.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 134.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. J. van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen, en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, xlv. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 511.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. G. Vorderman, “Planten-animisme op Java,” <i>Teysmannia</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, 1896, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59 <i>sq.</i>; <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 175.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. G. Vorderman, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 60; <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 176.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. G. Vorderman, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61⁠–⁠63.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Humboldt, <i>Voyage aux régions équinoxiales du Nouveau Continent</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Paris, 1819) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 369 <i>sq.</i>, 429 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Elsdon Best, “Maori Nomenclature,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 197.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 193; Theophrastus, <i>Historia plantarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 8. 4; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 31, 34 <i>sq.</i> In this passage Pliny states that naturalists distinguished the sexes of all trees and plants. On Assyrian monuments a winged figure is often represented holding an object which looks like a pine-cone to a palm-tree. The scene has been ingeniously and with great probability explained by Professor E. B. Tylor as the artificial fertilisation of the date-palm by means of the male inflorescence. See his paper in <i>Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 383⁠–⁠393. On the artificial fertilisation of the date-palm, see C. Ritter, <i>Vergleichende Erdkunde von Arabien</i> (Berlin, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 811, 827 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Chwolsohn, <i>Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1856), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 36, 251. Mohammed forbade the artificial fertilisation of the palm, probably because of the superstitions attaching to the ceremony. But he had to acknowledge his mistake. See D. S. Margoliouth, <i>Mohammed and the Rise of Islam</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 230 (a passage pointed out to me by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> A. W. Verrall).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir W. H. Sleeman, <i>Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Official</i> (Westminster, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 38 <i>sq.</i>; compare <i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>., <i>Central Provinces</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 92.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, lxxii., part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Calcutta, 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. Dubois, <i>Mœurs, institutions et cérémonies des peuples de l’Inde</i> (Paris, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 448 <i>sq.</i>; Monier Williams, <i>Religious Life and Thought in India</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 333⁠–⁠335; W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 110 <i>sq.</i> According to another account, it is Vishnu, not Krishna, to whom the holy plant is annually married in every pious Hindoo family. See <i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>., <i>Baroda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 125.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Henry M. Elliot, <i>Memoirs on the History, Folklore, and Distribution of the Races of the North-western Provinces of India</i>, edited by J. Beames (London, 1869), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 233 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 49.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir W. H. Sleeman, <i>Rambles and Recollections of an Indian Official</i> (Westminster, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 147⁠–⁠149, 175. The <i>Salagrama</i> is commonly perforated in one or more places by worms or, as the Hindoos believe, by the legendary insect Vajrakita or by Vishnu himself. The value of the fossil shell depends on its colour, and the number of its convolutions and holes. The black are prized as gracious embodiments of Vishnu; the violet are shunned as dangerous avatars of the god. He who possesses a black <i>Salagrama</i> keeps it wrapped in white linen, washes and adores it daily. A draught of the water in which the shell has been washed is supposed to purge away all sin and to secure the temporal and eternal welfare of the drinker. These fossils are found in Nepaul, in the upper course of the river Gandaka, a northern tributary of the Ganges. Hence the district goes by the name of Salagrami, and is highly esteemed for its sanctity; a visit to it confers great merit on a man. See Sonnerat, <i>Voyage aux Indes Orientales et à la Chine</i> (Paris, 1782), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 173 <i>sq.</i>; J. A. Dubois, <i>Mœurs, institutions et cérémonies des peuples de l’Indie</i> (Paris, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 446⁠–⁠448; Sir W. H. Sleeman, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 148 <i>sq.</i>, with the editor’s notes; Monier Williams, <i>Religious Thought and Life in India</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 69 <i>sq.</i>; G. Watt, <i>Dictionary of the Economic Products of India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. (London and Calcutta, 1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 384; W. Crooke, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 164 <i>sq.</i>; <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 146; G. Oppert, <i>On the Original Inhabitants of Bharatavarsa or India</i> (Westminster and Leipsic, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337⁠–⁠359; <i>id.</i>, “Note sur les Sālagrāmas,” <i>Comptes rendus de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</i> (Paris, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 472⁠–⁠485. The shell derives its name of ammonite from its resemblance to a ram’s horn, recalling the ram-god Ammon.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</i> (Chemnitz, 1759), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239 <i>sq.</i>; U. Jahn, <i>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 214 <i>sqq.</i> See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_17">17</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Van Schmid, “Aanteekeningen nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, der bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843 (Batavia), dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 605; A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 156.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell, <i>Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de Oeliasers</i> (Dordrecht, 1875), <abbr>p.</abbr> 62.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. A. Wilken, “Het animisme bij de volken van het Indischen archipel,” <i>De Indische Gids</i>, June 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 958; <i>id.</i>, <i>Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Indië</i> (Leyden, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 549 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. L. M. Kühr, “Schetsen uit Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, xlvii. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xliv. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 221.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Grangeon, “Les Cham et leur superstitions,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 83.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1872) <abbr>p.</abbr> 170.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 22, 138.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Id.</i>, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en Tomori,” <i>ib.</i>, xliv. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 227.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Snouck Hurgronje, <i>Het Gajōland en zijne Bewoners</i> (Batavia, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 344, 345.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Gason, “The Dieyerie Tribe,” <i>Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 280; A. W. Howitt, “The Dieri and other kindred Tribes of Central Australia,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 89.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Blumentritt, “Der Ahnencultus und die religiöse Anschauungen der Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,” <i>Mittheilungen der Wiener Geogr. Gesellschaft</i> (1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Versuch einer Ethnographie der Philippinen</i> (Gotha, 1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13, 29 (<i>Petermann’s Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 67); J. Mallat, <i>Les Philippines</i> (Paris, 1846), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 63 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Schadenberg, “Beiträge zur Kenntnis der im Innern Nordluzons lebenden Stämme,” <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i> (1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 40.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Grabowsky, “Der Tod, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, bei den Dajaken,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 181.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Low, <i>Sarawak</i> (London, 1848), <abbr>p.</abbr> 264.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bishop, <i>Korea and her Neighbours</i> (London, 1898), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 106 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. M. de Groot, <i>Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 462 <i>sqq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 277 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>La Mission lyonnaise d’exploration commerciale en Chine 1895⁠–⁠1897</i> (Lyons, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 361.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Der Muata Cazembe und die Völkerstämme der Maravis, Chevas, Muembas, Lundas und andere von Süd-Afrika,” <i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1856) <abbr>p.</abbr> 273.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major A. G. Leonard, <i>The Lower Niger and its Tribes</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 298 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Partridge, <i>Cross River Natives</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 272 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Partridge, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5, 194, 205 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. A. de Clercq, “De Westen Noordkust van Nederlandsch Nieuw-Guinea,” <i>Tijdschrift van het kon. Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Shamanism in Siberia and European Russia,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 136.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i>Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 28 (separate reprint from the <i>Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>loc. cit.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Aeneid</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 22 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Philostratus, <i>Imagines</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 29.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Landes, “Contes et légendes annamites,” <abbr>No.</abbr> 9, in <i>Cochinchine française: excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 20 (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Ellis, <i>The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 134⁠–⁠136.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> A. J. van Dinter, “Eenige geographische en ethnographische aanteekeningen betreffende het eiland Siaoe,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, xli. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 379 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Modigliani, <i>Un Viaggio a Nías</i> (Milan, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 629.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Baumann, <i>Usambara und seine Nachbargebiete</i> (Berlin, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 57 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162, 330 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: Die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 34 <i>sq.</i> On the Galla worship of trees, see further Mgr. Massaja, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1858) <abbr>p.</abbr> 50; Coulbeaux, “Au pays de Menelik,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 418.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Kubary, “Die Religion der Pelauer,” in A. Bastian’s <i>Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 52; <i>id.</i>, <i>Beiträge zur Kenntnis des Karolinen Archipels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Leyden, 1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 228.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Ellis, <i>The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xl. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xliv. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 220 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 242.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Habbema, “Bijgeloof in de Preanger-Regentschappen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, xli. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 113, 115.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Heijmering, “Zeden en Gewoonten op het eiland Rottie,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i> (1844), dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 358.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Snouck Hurgronje, <i>Het Gajōland en zijne Bewoners</i> (Batavia, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 351.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. A. L. Heyting, “Beschrijving der onder-afdeeling Groot-mandeling en Batang-natal,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 289 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Blumentritt, <i>Versuch einer Ethnographie der Philippinen</i> (Gotha, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 13 (<i>Petermanns Mittheilungen, Ergänzungheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 67). See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_18">18</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Crossland, quoted by H. Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 286; compare <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 114.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan à son évêque,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme. Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1834) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 182 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. T. Bent, <i>The Cyclades</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. L. Van Hasselt, <i>Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i> (Leyden, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 156.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 87.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I. M. van Baarda, “Île de Halma-heira,” <i>Bulletins de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 547.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Sternberg, “Die Religion der Gilyak,” <i>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 246.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 83.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1843) <abbr>p.</abbr> 29.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 17.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Perham, “Sea Dyak Religion,” <i>Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 10 (<abbr>Dec.</abbr> 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 217; H. Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 184.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Kükenthal, <i>Forschungsreise in den Molukken und in Borneo</i> (Frankfort, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 265 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 170.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 186, 188; compare A. Bastian, <i>Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 33; A. Bastian, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 16. Compare L. A. Waddell, “The Tribes of the Brahmaputra Valley,” <i>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, lxix. (1901) Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 16; W. Robertson Smith, <i>The Religion of the Semites</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 132 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 25; A. Bastian, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Het koppensnellen der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes en zijne beteekenis,” <i>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der konink. Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 195.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Niewenhuis, <i>In Centraal-Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1900), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 146; <i>id.</i>, <i>Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leyden, 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 107.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Id.</i>, “Tweede Reis van Pontianak naar Samarinda,” <i>Tijdschrift van het konink. Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 427.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Perham, “Sea Dyak Religion,” <i>Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 10 (December 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 217; H. Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 184.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Hagen, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss der Battareligion,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. 530, note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. W. Skeat, <i>Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 202.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Young, <i>The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 192 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman, <i>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, Part I. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Rangoon, 1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 518 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Macpherson, in <i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 112 § 428.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 91.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 134. The authority quoted by Bastian calls the people Curka Coles. As to the Larka Kols, see E. T. Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 177 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 130.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Mateer, <i>The Land of Charity</i> (London, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 206.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. A. Hely, in <i>Annual Report on British New Guinea for 1894⁠–⁠95</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 57.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. J. Hutchinson, <i>Impressions of Western Africa</i> (London, 1858), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 130 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gallieni, “Mission dans le Haut Niger et à Ségou,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), viiime Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1883) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 577 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. M. Doughty, <i>Travels in Arabia Deserta</i> (Cambridge, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 365.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Bent, “The Yourouks of Asia Minor,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 275.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Erasmus Stella, “De Borussiae antiquitatibus,” in Simon Grynaeus’s <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i> (Paris, 1532), <abbr>p.</abbr> 510; J. Lasicius (Lasiczki), “De diis Samagitarum caeterorumque Sarmatarum,” in <i>Respublica sive Status regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae, Livoniae, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i> (Leyden, 1627), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <i>sq.</i>; M. C. Hartknoch, <i>Alt und neues Preussen</i> (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1684), <abbr>p.</abbr> 120. Lasiczki’s work has been reprinted by W. Mannhardt, in <i>Magazin herausgegeben von der lettisch-lite-rärischen Gesellschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 82 <i>sqq.</i> (Mitau, 1868).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mathias Michov, in Simon Grynaeus’s <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i> (Paris, 1532), <abbr>p.</abbr> 457.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Kohl, <i>Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</i> (Dresden and Leipsic, 1841), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 277.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Capt.</abbr> E. C. Luard, <i>in Census of India, 1901</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (Lucknow, 1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 76.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 497; compare <i>id.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 540, 541.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Max Buch, <i>Die Wotjäken</i> (Stuttgart, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 124.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Stenin, “Ein neuer Beitrag zur Ethnographie der Tscheremissen,” <i>Globus</i>, lviii. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 204.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Dalyell, <i>Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i> (Edinburgh, 1834), <abbr>p.</abbr> 400.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Dalyell, <i>loc. cit.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Biddulph, <i>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 116.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. R. Tate, “Further Notes on the Kikuyu Tribe of British East Africa,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 263; <i>id.</i> “The Native Law of the Southern Gikuyu of British East Africa,” <i>Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 35 (April 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 242 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the representations of Silvanus, the Roman wood-god, see H. Jordan in L. Preller’s <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 393 note; A. Baumeister, <i>Denkmäler des classischen Altertums</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1665 <i>sq.</i> A good representation of Silvanus bearing a pine branch is given in the Sale Catalogue of H. Hoffmann, Paris, 1888, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aeneas Sylvius, <i>Opera</i> (Bâle, 1571), <abbr>p.</abbr> 418 [wrongly numbered 420]; compare Erasmus Stella, “De Borussiae antiquitatibus,” in <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 510.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman, <i>Gazetteer of Upper Burmah and the Shan States</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Rangoon, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Aymonier, in <i>Cochinchine française: excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 16 (Saigon, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 175 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Decle, <i>Three Years in Savage Africa</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 489.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 295 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248, 250, 309.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 284.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i> (Berlin, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158, 159, 170, 197, 214, 351, 514.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 188.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Villault, <i>Relation des costes appellées Guinée</i> (Paris, 1669), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 266 <i>sq.</i>; <i>Labat, Voyage du chevalier des Marchais en Guinée, isles voisines, et à Cayenne</i> (Paris, 1730), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 338.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Baumann, <i>Usambara und seine Nachbargebiete</i> (Berlin, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 142.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. E. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. Rochet d’Hericourt, <i>Voyage sur la côte orientale de la Mer Rouge dans le pays d’Adel et le royaume de Choa</i> (Paris, 1841), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 166 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <i>Peasant Life in Sweden</i> (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 190 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i> (Berlin, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Low, Sarawak, <abbr>p.</abbr> 274; <i>id.</i>, in <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 111.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. H. Lewin, <i>Wild Races of South-Eastern India</i> (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 270.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Mackenzie, <i>Ten Years North of the Orange River</i> (Edinburgh, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 385.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Campbell, <i>Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</i> (London, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 203.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Macdonald, <abbr>MS.</abbr> notes; compare <i>id.</i>, <i>Light in Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 210; <i>id.</i>, in <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 140. The Nubas will not cut shoots of the <i>nabac</i> (a thorn-tree) during the rainy season (<i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 460). Among some of the hill-tribes of the Punjaub no one is allowed to cut grass or any green thing with an iron sickle till the festival of the ripening grain has been celebrated; otherwise the field-god would be angry and send frost to destroy or injure the harvest (D. C. J. Ibbetson, <i>Outlines of Panjab Ethnography</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 121).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Ueber die Religion der heidnischen Tscheremissen im Gouvernement Kasan,” <i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, N. F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1857) <abbr>p.</abbr> 150.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Biddulph, <i>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 103 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Biddulph, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 106 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 102. See also Sir H. M. Elliot, <i>Memoirs on the History, Folk-lore, and Distribution of the Races of the North-Western Provinces of India</i>, edited by J. Beames, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 217, where, however, the object of the prayers is said to be the fruitfulness of the tree itself, not the fruitfulness of women, animals, and cattle.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 106.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. J. Hutchinson, <i>Impressions of Western Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161; E. Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 397; A. Peter, <i>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 286.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Camden, <i>Britannia</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> R. Gough (London, 1779), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 659. Camden’s authority is Good, a writer of the sixteenth century.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>County Folk-lore: Suffolk</i>, collected and edited by Lady Eveline Camilla Gurdon (London, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 117.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> E. F. Benson, in a letter to the author dated December 15, 1892.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Memoirs of Samuel Pepys, <abbr>Esq.</abbr></i>, edited by Lord Braybrooke, Second Edition (London, 1828), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 209, under May 1st, 1667.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lady Wilde, <i>Ancient Legends, Mystic Charms, and Superstitions of Ireland</i> (London, 1887), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 196 <i>sq.</i> If an Irish housewife puts a ring of rowan-tree or quicken, as it is also called, on the handle of the churn-dash when she is churning, no witch can steal her butter (P. W. Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 236 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Camden, <i>loc. cit.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Gregor, <i>Folk-lore of the North-east of Scotland</i> (London, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 188.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Campbell, <i>Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 270, compare <i>ib.</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 7 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Campbell, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11 <i>sq.</i> In Germany also the rowan-tree is a charm against witchcraft (A. Wuttke, <i>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 106, § 145).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir John Rhys, “The Coligny Calendar,” <i>Proceedings of the British Academy</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55 <i>sq.</i> of the offprint.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i> 2nd Ed., (Gütersloh, 1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 178 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Germanische Mythen</i> (Berlin, 1858), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. D. H. Temme, <i>Die Volkssagen der Altmark</i> (Berlin, 1839), <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; E. Sommer, <i>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</i> (Halle, 1846), <abbr>p.</abbr> 149; A. Kuhn, <i>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 154, § 432, <abbr>p.</abbr> 155, § 436; A. Schleicher, <i>Volkstümliches aus Sonnenberg</i> (Weimar, 1858), <abbr>p.</abbr> 139; A. Peter, <i>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</i> (Troppau, 1865⁠–⁠67), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 252; R. Eisel, <i>Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</i> (Gera, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 210; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 210; P. Drechsler, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipsic, 1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 109.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 166.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Drechsler, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 109 <i>sq.</i> Compare A. Peter, <i>loc. cit.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Müller, <i>Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</i> (Vienna and Olmütz, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 324.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 210.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 174.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Holzmayer, “Osiliana,” <i>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 (Dorpat, 1872), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 10 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 407 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Potocki, <i>Voyage dans les steps d’Astrakhan et du Caucase</i> (Paris, 1829), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 309.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Foy, in <i>Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 551. For details of the evidence see W. H. Goldie, M.D., “Maori Medical Lore,” <i>Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 93⁠–⁠95.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 163 <i>sqq.</i> To his authorities add for France, A. Meyrac, <i>Traditions, coutumes, légendes et contes des Ardennes</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 84 <i>sqq.</i>; L. F. Sauvé, <i>Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131 <i>sq.</i>; Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 309 <i>sq.</i>; Ch. Beauquier, <i>Les Mois en Franche-Comté</i> (Paris, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 69⁠–⁠72; F. Chapiseau, <i>Le Folk-lore de la Beauce et du Perche</i> (Paris, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 109⁠–⁠111; for Silesia, F. Tetzner, “Die Tschechen und Mährer in Schlesien,” <i>Globus</i>, lxxviii. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 340; P. Drechsler, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 112 <i>sq.</i>; for Moravia, W. Müller, <i>Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 26; for Sardinia, R. Tennant, <i>Sardinia and its Resources</i> (Rome and London, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185 <i>sq.</i> In Brunswick the custom is observed at Whitsuntide (R. Andree, <i>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 248).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 373.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Radloff, <i>Proben der Volkslitteratur der nördlichen Türkischen Stämme</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 2 (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1885).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 194; a similar custom is practised among the Kurmis, <i>ibid.</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 319. Among the Mundas the custom seems now to have fallen into disuse (H. H. Risley, <i>Tribes and Castes of Bengal: Ethnographic Glossary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 102).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The explanation has been suggested by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Crooke (<i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 243). There are other facts, however, which point to a different explanation, namely, that the practice is intended to avert possible evil consequences from bride or bridegroom. For example, “the superstition regarding a man’s third marriage, prevalent in Barār and, I believe in other parts of India, is not despised by the Vēlamās. A third marriage is unlucky. Should a man marry a third wife, it matters not whether his former wives be alive or not, evil will befall either him or that wife. No father would give his girl to a man whose third wife she would be. A man therefore, who has twice entered the married state and wishes to mate yet once again, cannot obtain as a third wife any one who has both the wit and the tongue to say no; a tree has neither, so to a tree he is married. I have not been able to discover why the tree, or rather shrub, called in Marāthī <i>ru’<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></i> and in Hindūstānī <i>madar</i> (<i>Asclepias gigantea</i>), is invariably the victim selected in Barār, nor do I know whether the shrub is similarly favoured in other parts of India. The ceremony consists in the binding of a <i>mangal sūtra</i> round the selected shrub, by which the bridegroom sits, while turmeric-dyed rice (<i>aká¹£ata</i>) is thrown over both him and the shrub. This is the whole of the simple ceremony. He has gone through his unlucky third marriage, and any lady whom he may favour after this will be his fourth wife” (Captain Wolseley Haig, “Notes on the Vēlamā Caste in Bārār,” <i>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, lxx. part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 28). Again, the Vellalas of Southern India “observe a curious custom (derived from Brāhmans) with regard to marriage, which is not unknown in other communities. A man marrying a second wife after the death of his first has to marry a plantain tree, and cut it down before tying the <i>tāli</i>, and, in case of a third marriage, a man has to tie a <i>tāli</i> first to the erukkan (arka: <i>Calotropis gigantea</i>) plant. The idea is that second and fourth wives do not prosper, and the tree and the plant are accordingly made to take their places.” (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hemingway, quoted by E. Thurston, <i>Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 387). Tying the <i>tali</i> to the bride is the common Hindoo symbol of marriage, like giving the ring with us. As to these Indian marriages to trees see further my <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 32 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 210 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. § 252, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. §§ 12, 90, 562, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. § 396; <i>North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. § 110; D. C. J. Ibbetson, <i>Settlement Report of the Karnal District</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 155; H. H. Risley, <i>Tribes and Castes of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 531; <abbr>Capt.</abbr> E. C. Luard, in <i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. 76; W. Crooke, <i>Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 363; <i>id.</i>, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 115⁠–⁠121. I was formerly disposed to connect the custom with totemism, but of this there seems to be no sufficient evidence.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 51 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Merolla, “Voyage to Congo,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 236 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Bötticher, <i>Der Baumkultus der Hellenen</i> (Berlin, 1856), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted by J. Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 246 (<abbr>ed.</abbr> Bohn).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 254.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Borlase, <i>The Natural History of Cornwall</i> (Oxford, 1758), <abbr>p.</abbr> 294.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 212 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>Popular British Customs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 233.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Chambers, <i>Book of Days</i> (London and Edinburgh, 1886), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 578; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 237 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Hone, <i>Every Day Book</i> (London, <span class="fss">N.D.</span>), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 615 <i>sq.</i>; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 251 <i>sq.</i> At Polebrook in Northamptonshire the verses sung by the children on their rounds include two which are almost identical with those sung at Abingdon in Berkshire. See Dyer, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 255 <i>sq.</i> The same verses were formerly sung on May Day at Hitchin in Hertfordshire (Hone, <i>Every Day Book</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 567 <i>sq.</i>; Dyer, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 240 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dyer, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 263.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Percy Manning, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 403 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Id.</i>, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 308. Customs of the same sort are reported also from Combe, Headington, and Islip, all in Oxfordshire (Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 261 <i>sq.</i>). See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_90">90</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dyer, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 243.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. D. Rouse, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 53. I have witnessed the ceremony almost annually for many years. Many of the hoops have no doll, and ribbons or rags of coloured cloth are more conspicuous than flowers in their decoration.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. P. Emslie, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 210.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Memoirs of Anna Maria Wilhelmina Pickering</i>, edited by her son, Spencer Pickering (London, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 160 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lady Wilde, <i>Ancient Cures, Charms, and Usages of Ireland</i> (London, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <i>sq.</i> At the ancient Greek festival of the Daphnephoria or “Laurel-bearing” a staff of olive-wood, decked with laurels, purple ribbons, and many-coloured flowers, was carried in procession, and attached to it were two large globes representing the sun and moon, together with a number of smaller globes which stood for the stars. See Proclus, quoted by Photius, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 321, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bekker.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Cortet, <i>Essai sur les fêtes religieuses</i> (Paris, 1867) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 167 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Revue des traditions populaires</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 200.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Müller, <i>Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</i> (Wien und Olmütz, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 319 <i>sq.</i>, 355⁠–⁠359.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 518 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Songs of the Russian People</i> 2nd Ed., (London, 1872), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 234 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <i>Märkische Sagen und Märchen</i> (Berlin, 1843), <abbr>p.</abbr> 315.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <i>Peasant Life in Sweden</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Pröhle, <i>Harzbilder</i> (Leipsic, 1855), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19 <i>sq.</i> Compare <i>id.</i>, in <i>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1853) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Germanische Mythen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 512 <i>sqq.</i>; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i> (Leipsic, 1848), <abbr>p.</abbr> 390, § 80.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i> (Prague, <span class="fss">N.D.</span>), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 308 <i>sq.</i> A fuller description of the ceremony will be given later.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the evidence see J. Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 234 <i>sqq.</i>; W. Hone, <i>Every Day Book</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 547 <i>sqq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 574 <i>sqq.</i>; R. Chambers, <i>Book of Days</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 574 <i>sqq.</i>; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <i>sqq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Phillip Stubbes, <i>The Anatomie of Abuses</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 149 (F. J. Furnivall’s reprint). In later editions some verbal changes were made.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Borlase, <i>Natural History of Cornwall</i> (Oxford, 1758), <abbr>p.</abbr> 294.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Hutchinson, <i>View of Northumberland</i> (Newcastle, 1778), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Appendix, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13 <i>sq.</i>; Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Padstow ‘Hobby Hoss,’ ” <i>Folklore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Meier, <i>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i> (Stuttgart, 1852), <abbr>p.</abbr> 396.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Mogk, in R. Wuttke’s <i>Sächsische Volkskunde</i> 2nd Ed., (Dresden, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Rentsch, in R. Wuttke’s <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 359.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. De Nore, <i>Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de France</i> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), <abbr>p.</abbr> 137.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Superstitions et survivances</i> (Paris, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 308 <i>sq.</i> Compare <i>id.</i>, <i>Reminiscences populaires de la Provence</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21 <i>sq.</i>, 26, 27.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman, <i>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Rangoon, 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 529.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Hone, <i>Every Day Book</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 547 <i>sqq.</i>; R. Chambers, <i>Book of Days</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 571.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 372.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Hone, <i>Every Day Book</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 597 <i>sq.</i> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> G. W. Prothero tells me that about the year 1875 he saw a permanent May-pole decked with flowers on May Day on the road between Cambridge and <abbr>St.</abbr> Neot’s, not far from the turning to Caxton.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_47">47</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 217; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 566.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Birlinger, <i>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i> (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1861⁠–⁠1862), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 74 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 566.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristophanes, <i>Plutus</i>, 1054; W. Mannhardt, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 222 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 112⁠–⁠114. Some traits in this story seem to suggest that the return of the trooper to his old home was, like that of the war-broken veteran in Campbell’s poem, only a soldier’s dream.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 86 <i>sqq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 156.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Chambers, <i>Book of Days</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 573. Compare the Cambridge custom, described above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_62">62</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 312.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 313.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Ibid.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 314.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 357; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 312 <i>sq.</i> The word <i>Walber</i> probably comes from Walburgis, which is doubtless only another form of the better known Walpurgis. The second of May is called Walburgis Day, at least in this part of Bavaria.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 313 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. von Wlislocki, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigeuner</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 148 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. T. Dalton, <i>Descriptive Ethnology of Bengal</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 261.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. A. Gupte, “Harvest Festivals in honour of Gauri and Ganesh,” <i>Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 61.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 315 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Russian Folk-tales</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 345. As to Green George see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_75">75</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 234.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 318; J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 657.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. de Nore, <i>Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de France</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <i>sq.</i>; Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Réminiscences populaires de la Provence</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Meyrac, <i>Traditions, coutumes, légendes et contes des Ardennes</i> (Charleville, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 79⁠–⁠82. The girl was called the Trimouzette. A custom of the same general character was practised down to recent times in the Jura (Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Réminiscences populaires de la Provence</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 18).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. A. Reimann, <i>Deutsche Volksfeste im neunzehnten Jahrhundert</i> (Weimar, 1839), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 159 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 320; A. Witzschel, <i>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 211.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Kolbe, <i>Hessische Volks-Sitten und Gebräuche im Lichte der heidnischen Vorzeit</i> (Marburg, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 359 <i>sq.</i> Similarly in the Département de l’Ain (France) on the first of May eight or ten boys unite, clothe one of their number in leaves, and go from house to house begging (W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 318).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Hoffmann-Krayer, “Fruchtbarkeitsriten im schweizerischen Volksbrauch,” <i>Schweizerisches Archiv für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 252.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 322; W. Hone, <i>Every-Day Book</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 583 <i>sqq.</i>; T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 230 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. D. Rouse, “May-Day in Cheltenham,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50⁠–⁠53. On May Day 1891 I saw a Jack-in-the-Green in the streets of Cambridge.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 323.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 323; H. Herzog, <i>Schweizerische Volksfeste, Sitten und Gebräuche</i> (Aarau, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Birlinger, <i>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 114 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 325.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 314 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 380.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Tetzner, “Die Tschechen und Mährer in Schlesien,” <i>Globus</i>, lxviii (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 340.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 383 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 342.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Andree, <i>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</i> (Brunswick, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Seifart, <i>Sagen, Märchen, Schwänke und Gebräuche aus Stadt und Stift Hildesheim</i>, Zweite Auflage (Hildesheim, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 180 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 342 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. A. Reimann, <i>Deutsche Volksfeste im neunzehnten Jahrhundert</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157⁠–⁠159; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 347 <i>sq.</i>; A. Witzschel, <i>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</i> (Vienna, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 203.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 253 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 262; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 353 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 355.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 292, 293.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 93; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 344.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 343 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 344 <i>sqq.</i>; E. Cortet, <i>Fêtes religieuses</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 160 <i>sqq.</i>; D. Monnier, <i>Traditions populaires comparées</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 282 <i>sqq.</i>; Bérenger-Féraud, <i>Réminiscences populaires de la Provence</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <i>sq.</i>; Ch. Beauquier, <i>Les Mois en Franche-Comté</i> (Paris, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 65⁠–⁠69. In Franche-Comté she seems to be generally known as <i>l’épousée</i>, “the spouse.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From information given me by Mabel Bailey, in the service of Miss A. Wyse of Halford. My informant’s father is a native of Stourton, and she herself has spent much of her life there. I conjecture that the conical flower-bedecked structure may once have been borne by a mummer concealed within it. Compare the customs described above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_82">82</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_24">24</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From information given me by Miss A. Wyse of Halford.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 265 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 422.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Drechsler, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipsic, 1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125⁠–⁠129.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Monnier, <i>Traditions populaires comparées</i> (Paris, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 304; E. Cortet, <i>Fêtes religieuses</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 423.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 233 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 424. We have seen (<abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_62">62</a>) that a custom of the same sort used to be observed at Bampton-in-the-Bush in Oxfordshire.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Hoffmann-Krayer, “Fruchtbarkeitsriten im schweizerischen Volksbrauch,” <i>Schweizerisches Archiv für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Sommer, <i>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</i> (Halle, 1843), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 151 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, Baumkultus, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 431 <i>sq.</i> The custom is now obsolete (E. Mogk, in R. Wuttke’s <i>Sächsische Volkskunde</i>, 2nd Ed., Dresden, 1901, <abbr>p.</abbr> 309).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. F. Feilberg, in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_65">65</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <i>Peasant Life in Sweden</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. C. Crofts, in a letter to me dated February 3, 1901, 9 Northwich Terrace, Cheltenham.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For details see <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 202 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This custom was told to W. Mannhardt by a French prisoner in the war of 1870⁠–⁠71 (<i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 434).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 434 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Ibid.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 435.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_76">76</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Martin, <i>Description of the Western Islands of Scotland</i> (London, 1673 [1703]), <abbr>p.</abbr> 119; <i>id.</i> in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 613; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 436. According to Martin, the ceremony took place on Candlemas Day, the second of February. But this seems to be a mistake. See J. G. Campbell, <i>Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 247 <i>sq.</i> The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> James Macdonald, of Reay in Caithness, was assured by old people that the sheaf used in making Briid’s bed was the last sheaf cut at harvest (J. Macdonald, <i>Religion and Myth</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 141). Later on we shall see that the last sheaf is often regarded as embodying the spirit of the corn, and special care is therefore taken of it.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Ramsay of Ochtertyre, <i>Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century</i>, edited by Alex. Allardyce (Edinburgh, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 447. At Ballinasloe in County Galway it is customary to fasten a cross of twisted corn in the roof of the cottages on Candlemas Day. The cross is fastened by means of a knife stuck through a potato, and remains in its place for months, if not for a year. This custom (of which I was informed by Miss Nina Hill in a letter dated May 5, 1898) may be connected with the Highland one described in the text.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Train, <i>Historical and Statistical Account of the Isle of Man</i> (Douglas, Isle of Man, 1845), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 116.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_240">240</a> <i>sqq.</i> Brigit is the true original form of the name, which has been corrupted into Breed, Bride, and Bridget. See Douglas Hyde, <i>A Literary History of Ireland</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 53, note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <i>Märkische Sagen und Märchen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 318 <i>sqq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 437.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 438.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Andree, <i>Braunschweiger Volkskunde</i> (Brunswick, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 248.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Monnier, <i>Traditions populaires comparées</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 283 <i>sq.</i>; E. Cortet, <i>Fêtes religieuses</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 439 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_67">67</a>, and below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_104">104</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique Centrale</i> (Paris, 1857⁠–⁠1859), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 565; H. H. Bancroft, <i>Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 719 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 507; O. Stoll, <i>Die Ethnologie der Indianerstämme von Guatemala</i> (Leyden, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 47.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. J. de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 36 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. A. Wilken, “Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel,” <i>De Indische Gids</i>, June 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 958.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. F. Riedel, <i>De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337, 372⁠–⁠375, 410 <i>sq.</i>; G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell, in <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204 <i>sq.</i>, 206 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, in <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 134; J. A. Jacobsen, <i>Reisen in die Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123, 125; J. H. de Vries, “Reis door eenige eilandgroepen der Residentie Amboina,” <i>Tijdschrift van het konink</i>. <i>Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 594, 612, 615 <i>sq.</i> The name of the festival is variously given as <i>porĕke</i>, <i>porĕka</i>, <i>porka</i>, and <i>purka</i>. In the island of Timor the marriage of the Sun-god with Mother Earth is deemed the source of all fertility and growth. See J. S. G. Gramberg, “Eene maand in de Binnenlanden van Timor,” <i>Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. 206 <i>sq.</i>; H. Sondervan, “Timor en de Timoreezen,” <i>Tijdschriftvan het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1888), Afdeeling meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>p.</abbr> 397.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. C. Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maimonides, translated by D. Chwolsohn, <i>Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 475. It is not quite clear whether the direction, which Maimonides here attributes to the heathen of Harran, is taken by him from the beginning of <i>The Agriculture of the Nabataeans</i>, which he had referred to a few lines before. The first part of that work appears to be lost, though other parts of it exist in manuscript at Paris, Oxford, and elsewhere. See D. Chwolsohn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 697 <i>sqq.</i> The book is an early Mohammedan forgery; but the superstitions it describes may very well be genuine. See A. von Gutschmid, <i>Kleine Schriften</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 568⁠–⁠713.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell, <i>Ambon en meer bepaaldelijk de Oeliasers</i> (Dordrecht, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Kreemer, “Tiang-dèrès” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128⁠–⁠132. This and the preceding custom have been already quoted by G. A. Wilken (“Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel,” <i>De Indische Gids</i>, June 1884, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 962 <i>sq.</i>; and <i>Handleiding voor de vorgelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i> (Leyden, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 550).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_26">26</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Svoboda, “Die Bewohner des Nikobaren-Archipels,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <i>sq.</i> For other examples of a fruitful woman making trees fruitful, see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 140 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32⁠–⁠35, 38, 80. The Peruvian custom described above (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 266) may in like manner have been intended to promote the growth of beans through the fertilising influence of the parents of twins. On the contrary among the Bassari of Togo, in Western Africa, women who have given birth to twins may not go near the farm at the seasons of sowing and reaping, lest they should destroy the crop. Only after the birth of another child does custom allow them to share again the labour of the fields. See H. Klose, <i>Togo unter deutscher Flagge</i> (Berlin, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 510.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 480 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Mythologische Forschungen</i> (Strasburg, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 341.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 181.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>My informant is <abbr>Prof.</abbr> W. Ridgeway. The place was a field at the head of the Dargle vale, near Enniskerry.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_67">67</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. W. W. C. Baron van Hoëvell, in <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 134 note. The custom seems to go by the name of <i>dauwtroppen</i> or “dew-treading.” As districts or places in which the practice is still kept up the writer names South Holland, Dordrecht, and Rotterdam.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Strackerjan, <i>Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</i> (Oldenburg, 1867), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 78, § 361; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 481; <i>id.</i>, <i>Mythologische Forschungen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 340. Compare Th. Siebs, “Das Saterland,” <i>Zeitschrift für Volkskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 277.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 138, <i>ibid.</i> xl. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. F. Oviedo y Valdes, <i>Histoire du Nicaragua</i> (published in Ternaux-Compans’ <i>Voyages, relations et mémoires originaux</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>), Paris, 1840, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <i>sq.</i>; A. de Herrera, <i>General History of the Vast Continent and Islands called America</i> (Stevens’s translation, London, 1725⁠–⁠26), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 298.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Sapper, “Die Gebräuche und religiösen Anschauungen der Kekchi-Indianer,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 203. Abstinence from women for several days is also practised before the sowing of beans and of chilis, but only by Indians who do a large business in these commodities (<i>ibid.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 205).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Heinrich, <i>Agrarische Sitten und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</i> (Hermannstadt, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Temesvary, <i>Volksbräuche und Aberglauben in der Geburtshilfe und der Pflege der Neugebornen in Ungarn</i> (Leipsic, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 16.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 293. See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. H. Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 134.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Chalmers, <i>Pioneering in New Guinea</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 181. The word which I have taken to mean “holy or taboo” is <i>helaga</i>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chalmers does not translate or explain it. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> C. G. Seligmann says that the word “conveys something of the idea of ‘sacred,’ ‘set apart,’ ‘charged with virtue’ ” (<i>The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 101, note 2).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Haddon, <i>Head-hunters</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270⁠–⁠272, 275 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. C. Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. C. Hodson, “The <i>genna</i> amongst the Tribes of Assam,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 54; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. 6 <i>sq.</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 166, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Th. Mommsen (first edition).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>Histor. plant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 4. 5 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Palladius, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 6. 14; <i>Geoponica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 3. 5 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With what follows compare <i>Psyche’s Task</i>, chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31 <i>sqq.</i>, where I have adduced the same evidence to some extent in the same words.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Mason, “On dwellings, works of art, laws, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, of the Karens,” <i>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1868) Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147 <i>sq.</i> Compare A. R. M’Mahon, <i>The Karens of the Golden Chersonese</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 334 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Neumann, “Het Pane- en Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,” <i>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3 (1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 514 <i>sq.</i>; M. Joustra, “Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xlvi. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 411.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Ling Roth, “Low’s natives of Borneo,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 113 <i>sq.</i>, 133, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 24; <i>id.</i>, <i>Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 401. Compare <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Perham, “Petara, or Sea Dyak Gods,” <i>Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 8, December 1881, <abbr>p.</abbr> 150; H. Ling Roth, <i>Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 180. According to Archdeacon Perham, “Every district traversed by an adulterer is believed to be accursed of the gods until the proper sacrifice has been offered.” In respectable Dyak families, when an unmarried girl is found with child and the father is unknown, they sacrifice a pig and sprinkle the doors with its blood to wash away the sin (Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <i>Life in the Forests of the Far East</i>, 2nd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 64). In Ceram a person convicted of unchastity has to expiate his guilt by smearing every house in the village with the blood of a pig and a fowl. See A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Berlin, 1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 144.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <i>Quer durch Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1904⁠–⁠1907), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 367.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <i>Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 99; <i>id.</i>, <i>In Centraal Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1900), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 278.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. F. Matthes, “Over de <i>âdá’s</i> of gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegineezen,” <i>Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Derde Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. (Amsterdam, 1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 182. The similar Roman penalty for parricide (<i>Digest</i>, xlviii. 9. 9; Valerius Maximus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 13; J. E. B. Mayor’s note on Juvenal <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 214) may have been adopted for a similar reason. But in that case the scourging which preceded the drowning can hardly have been originally a part of the punishment.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xliv. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Mori,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xliv. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 162.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. J. van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, xlv. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 514. In the Banggai Archipelago, to the east of Celebes, earthquakes are explained as punishments inflicted by evil spirits for indulgence in illicit love (F. S. A. de Clercq, <i>Bijdragen tot de Kennis der Residentie Ternate</i> (Leyden, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 132).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Dapper, <i>Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 326; R. E. Dennett, <i>At the Back of the Black Man’s Mind</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 53, 67⁠–⁠71.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. E. Dennett, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 52.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Hollis, <i>The Nandi, their Language and Folk-lore</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>p.</abbr> 76.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> E. Casalis, <i>The Basutos</i> (London, 1861), <abbr>p.</abbr> 252.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 718 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van Midden Celebes,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, xliv. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Probably a similar extension of the superstition to animal life occurs also among savages, though the authorities I have consulted do not mention it. A trace, however, of such an extension appears in a belief entertained by the Khasis of Assam, that if a man defies tribal custom by marrying a woman of his own clan, the women of the tribe will die in childbed and the people will suffer from other calamities. See Colonel P. R. T. Gurdon, <i>The Khasis</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94, 123.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Job <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. 11 <i>sq.</i> (Revised Version).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>תבואה. See <i>Hebrew and English Lexicon</i>, by F. Brown, S. R. Driver, and Ch. A. Briggs (Oxford, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 100.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Genesis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 10⁠–⁠20, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. 1⁠–⁠18.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Leviticus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 24 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sophocles, <i>Oedipus Tyrannus</i>, 22 <i>sqq.</i>, 95 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 4 and 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Columella, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 2 <i>sq.</i>, appealing to the authority of M. Ambivius, Maenas Licinius, and C. Matius. See on this subject below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_205">205</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Keating, <i>History of Ireland</i>, translated by J. O’Mahony (New York, 1857), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337 <i>sq.</i>; P. W. Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 512 <i>sq.</i>; J. Rhys, <i>Celtic Heathendom</i> (London and Edinburgh, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 308 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 153 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Next (for hear me out now, readers) that I may tell ye whither my younger feet wandered; I betook me among those lofty fables and romances which recount in solemn cantos the deeds of knighthood founded by our victorious kings, and from hence had in renown over all Christendom. There I read it in the oath of every knight that he should defend to the utmost expense of his best blood, or of his life, if it so befell him, the honour and chastity of virgin or matron; from whence even then I learned what a noble virtue chastity sure must be, to the defence of which so many worthies, by such a dear adventure of themselves, had sworn; and if I found in the story afterward any of them by word or deed breaking that oath, I judged it the same fault of the poet as that which is attributed to Homer, to have written indecent things of the gods. Only this my mind gave me, that every free and gentle spirit, without that oath, ought to be born a knight, nor needed to expect the gilt spur or the laying of a sword upon his shoulder to stir him up both by his counsel and his arm, to secure and protect the weakness of any attempted chastity” (Milton, “Apology for Smectymnuus,” <i>Complete Collection of the Historical, Political, and Miscellaneous Works of John Milton</i> (London, 1738), <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 111).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of chastity observed at home by the friends of the absent warriors, see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128, 131, 133. Examples of chastity observed by the warriors themselves in the field will be given in the second part of this work. Meanwhile see <i>The Golden Bough</i>, 2nd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 328, note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Speaking of the one God who reveals himself in many forms and under many names, Augustine says: “<i>Ipse in aethere sit Jupiter, ipse in aëre Juno, ipse in mare Neptunus⁠ ⁠… Liber in vineis, Ceres in frumentis, Diana in silvis</i>,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> (<i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 11).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 332: “<i>Nam, ut diximus, et omnis quercus Jovi est consecrata, et omnis lucus Dianae.</i>”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. Roscher, <i>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1005; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, Nos. 3266⁠–⁠3268.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>No.</abbr> 568; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 686; E. S. Roberts, <i>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., <abbr>No.</abbr> 139.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 653, lines 79 <i>sqq.</i>; Ch. Michel, <i>op. cit.</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 694. As to the grove see Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 33. 4 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i>op. cit.</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 929, lines 80 <i>sqq.</i> Compare <i>id.</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 569; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 28. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 4911.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cato, <i>De agri cultura</i>, 139.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 85, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Henzen, <i>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</i> (Berlin, 1874), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 136⁠–⁠143; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., Nos. 5042, 5043, 5045, 5046, 5048.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 749⁠–⁠755.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Seneca, <i>Epist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 12. 3. See further L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 108 <i>sqq.</i> For evidence of the poets he refers to Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 332 <i>sqq.</i>; Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 11; Ovid, <i>Amores</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1. 1 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On Diana as a huntress see H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, Nos. 3257⁠–⁠3266. For indications of her care for domestic cattle see Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 45; Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 4; and above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 600 <i>sq.</i>, with Servius’s note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. A. Castren, <i>Vorlesungen über die finnische Mythologie</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1853), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92⁠–⁠99.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Stenin, “Über den Geisterglauben in Russland,” <i>Globus</i>, lvii. (1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 283.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Abercromby, <i>The Pre- and Proto-historic Finns</i> (London, 1898), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 161.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mathias Michov, “De Sarmatia Asiana atque Europea,” in <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 457.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Snouck Hurgronje, <i>Het Gajōland en zijne Bewoners</i> (Batavia, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 351, 359.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 14.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arrian, <i>Cynegeticus</i>, 33 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Galatians retained their Celtic speech as late as the fourth century of our era, for Jerome says that in his day their language hardly differed from that of the Treveri, a Celtic tribe on the Moselle, whose name survives in <i>Treves</i>. See Jerome, <i>Commentar. in Epist. ad Galatas</i>, <abbr>lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. praef. (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Latina</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. col. 357).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_363">363</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 4633; Ihm, in Pauly-Wissowa’s <i>Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 616, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Arduinna”; compare <i>id.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 104, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Abnoba.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 125.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. H. Schmitz, <i>Sitten und Bräuche, Lieder, Sprüchwörter und Räthsel des Eifler Volkes</i> (Treves, 1856⁠–⁠1858), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 42 <i>sq.</i>; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 393 <i>sq.</i>; Ch. Beauquier, <i>Les Mois en Franche-Comté</i> (Paris, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 90. In Sweden and parts of Germany cattle are crowned on the day in spring when they are first driven out to pasture, which is sometimes at Whitsuntide (A. Kuhn, <i>Die Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 163 <i>sq.</i>; L. Lloyd, <i>Peasant Life in Sweden</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 246 <i>sq.</i>; A. Kuhn, <i>Märkische Sagen und Märchen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 315 sq., 327 <i>sq.</i>; P. Drechsler, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 123). Amongst the Romans cattle were crowned at the Ambarvalia (Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 7 <i>sq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 663); and asses and mill-stones were crowned at Vesta’s festival on the ninth of June (Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 21; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 311 <i>sq.</i>). The original motive of all these customs may have been the one indicated in the text. Perhaps the same explanation might be found to apply to certain other cases of wearing wreaths or crowns.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tettau und Temme, <i>Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 263 <i>sq.</i>; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 392; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Das festliche Jahr</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 181; <i>id.</i>, <i>Calendrier belge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 423 <i>sq.</i>; A. Birlinger, <i>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 278, § 437; R. Eisel, <i>Sagenbuch des Voigtlandes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 210; F. J. Wiedemann, <i>Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 363; F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 128.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_52">52</a>−55.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Nepaul a festival known as Khichâ Pûjâ is held, at which worship is offered to dogs, and garlands of flowers are placed round the necks of every dog in the country (W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i>, Westminster, 1896, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 221). But as the custom is apparently not limited to hunting dogs, the explanation suggested above would hardly apply.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Catullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. 9⁠–⁠20; Cicero, <i>De natura deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 26. 68 <i>sq.</i>; Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 68 <i>sq.</i> It deserves to be remembered that Diana’s day was the thirteenth of August, which in general would be the time when the splendid harvest moon was at the full. Indian women in Peru used to pray to the moon to grant them an easy delivery. See P. J. de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>p.</abbr> 32.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In like manner the Greeks conceived of the goddess Earth as the mother not only of corn but of cattle and of human offspring. See the Homeric <i>Hymn to Earth</i> (<abbr>No.</abbr> 30).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 1. 4 and 5, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 179 <i>sq.</i> The image on the Aventine was copied from that at Marseilles, which in turn was copied from the one at Ephesus.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 8. The Romans feared that the marriage of Claudius with his paternal cousin Agrippina, which they regarded as incest, might result in some public calamity (Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 5).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_107">107</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 20 <i>sq.</i>, 40.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 181 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Jastrow, <i>Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <i>sq.</i>; L. W. King, <i>Babylonian Mythology and Religion</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18, 21.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Winckler, <i>Die Gesetze Hammurabis</i> 2nd Ed., (Leipsic, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 31 § 182. The expression is translated “votary of Marduk” by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. H. W. Johns (<i>Babylonian and Assyrian Laws, Contracts, and Letters</i>, Edinburgh, 1904, <abbr>p.</abbr> 60). “The votary of Marduk is the god’s wife vowed to perpetual chastity, and is therefore distinct from the devotees of IÅ¡tar. Like the ordinary courtesan, these formed a separate class and enjoyed special privileges” (S. A. Cook, <i>The Laws of Moses and the Code of Hammurabi</i>, London, 1903, <abbr>p.</abbr> 148).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Jastrow, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 42 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Johnston in <i>Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. First Half (1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 153⁠–⁠155; R. F. Harper, <i>Assyrian and Babylonian Literature</i> (New York, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 249. For the equivalence of Iyyar or Airu with May see <i>Encyclopaedia Biblica</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Months,” <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. coll. 3193 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 182.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Maspero, in <i>Journal des Savants</i>, année 1899, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 401⁠–⁠406; A. Moret, <i>Du caractère religieux de la royauté Pharaonique</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48⁠–⁠73; A. Wiedemann, <i>Herodots zweites Buch</i> (Leipsic, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 268 sq. M. Moret shares the view of <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Maspero that the pictures, or rather painted reliefs, were copied from masquerades in which the king and other men and women figured as gods and goddesses. As to the Egyptian doctrine of the spiritual double or external soul (<i>Ka</i>), see A. Wiedemann, <i>The Ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul</i> (London, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 10 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Erman, <i>Die ägyptische Religion</i> (Berlin, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75, 165 <i>sq.</i>; compare <i>id.</i>, <i>Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 400 <i>sq.</i> As to the ghostly rule of the high priests of Ammon at Thebes see further G. Maspero, <i>Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique, les premières mêlées des peuples</i> (Paris, 1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 559 <i>sqq.</i>; J. H. Breasted, <i>A History of the Ancient Egyptians</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 350 <i>sq.</i>, 357 <i>sq.</i>; C. P. Tiele, <i>Geschichte der Religion im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Gotha, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 66.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 1. 46, <abbr>p.</abbr> 816.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 47.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones conviviales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 1. 6 sq.; id., <i>Numa</i>, 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 143. Compare Horace, <i>Odes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 62 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 182.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 13. 1. As to the meaning of the title Essen see Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Zeus</i>, 16; Hesychius, Suidas, and <i>Etymologicum Magnum</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Ἕσσην. The ancients mistook the Queen bee for a male, and hence spoke of King bees. See Aristotle, <i>Histor. animal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 21 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 40, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 553, 623 <i>sqq.</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bekker; id., <i>De animalium generatione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 10, <abbr>p.</abbr> 760, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bekker; Aelian, <i>Nat. animal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 10, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 10 <i>sq.</i>; Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 21, 68; W. Walter-Tornow, <i>De apium mellisque apud veteres significatione</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30 <i>sqq.</i> The Essenes or King Bees are not to be confounded with the nominal kings (<i>Basileis</i>) of Ephesus, who probably held office for life. See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 47.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. T. Wood, <i>Discoveries at Ephesus, Inscriptions from the Temple of Diana</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 2, 14; <i>Inscriptions from the Augusteum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 4; <i>Inscriptions from the City and Suburbs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 38.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See B. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Head, <i>Coins of Ephesus</i> (London, 1880), and above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37 <i>sq.</i> Modern writers sometimes assert that the priestesses of the Ephesian Artemis were called Bees. Certain other Greek priestesses were undoubtedly called Bees, and it seems not improbable that the priestesses of the Ephesian Artemis bore the same title and represented the goddess in her character of a bee. But no ancient writer, so far as I know, affirms it. See my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 13. 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Demosthenes, <i>Contra Neaer.</i> 73⁠–⁠78, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1369⁠–⁠1371; Aristotle, <i>Constitution of Athens</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 5; Hesychius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vv</span>.</i> Διονύσου γάμος and γεραραί; <i>Etymologicum Magnum</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> γεραῖραι; Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 108; K. F. Hermann, <i>Gottesdienstliche Alterthümer</i>, 2nd Ed., § 32. 15, § 58. 11 <i>sqq.</i>; <abbr>Aug.</abbr> Mommsen, <i>Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum</i> (Leipsic, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 391 <i>sqq.</i> From Demosthenes, <i>l.c.</i>, compared with Thucydides, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 15, it seems certain that the oath was administered by the Queen at the time and place mentioned in the text. Formerly it was assumed that her marriage to Dionysus was celebrated at the same place and time; but the assumption as to the place was disproved by the discovery of Aristotle’s <i>Constitution of Athens</i>, and with it the assumption as to the time falls to the ground. As the Greek months were commonly named after the festivals which were held in them, it is tempting to conjecture that the sacred marriage took place in the Marriage Month (<i>Gamelion</i>), answering to our January. But more probably that month was named after the sacred marriage of Zeus and Hera, which was celebrated at Athens and elsewhere. See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_143">143</a>. This is the view of W. H. Roscher (<i>Juno und Hera</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 73, n. 217) and <abbr>Aug.</abbr> Mommsen (<i>Feste der Stadt Athen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 383). From the name Cattle-stall, applied to the scene of the marriage, Miss J. E. Harrison ingeniously conjectured that in the rite Dionysus may have been represented as a bull (<i>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 537). The conjecture was anticipated by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, <i>Aristoteles und Athen</i> (Berlin, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 42. Dionysus was often conceived by the Greeks in the form of a bull.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_92">92</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Preller, <i>Ausgewählte Aufsätze</i> (Berlin, 1864), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 293⁠–⁠296; compare his <i>Griechische Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Robert, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 681 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hyginus, <i>Astronomica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tertullian, <i>Ad nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 7, “<i>Cur rapitur sacerdos Cereris si non tale Ceres passa est?</i>” Asterius Amasenus, <i>Encomium in sanctos martyres</i>, in Migne’s <i>Patrologia Graeca</i>, xl. col. 324, Οὐκ ἐκεῖ (at Eleusis) τὸ καταβάσιον τὸ σκοτεινόν, καὶ αἱ σεμναὶ τοῦ ἱεροφάντου πρὸς τὴν ἱερείαν συντυχίαι, μόνου πρὸς μόνην; Οὐχ αἱ λαμπάδες σβέννυνται, καὶ ὁ πολὺς καὶ ἀναρίθμητος δῆμος τὴν σωτηρίαν αὐτῶν εἶναι νομίζουσι τὰ ἐν τῷ σκότῳ παρὰ τῶν δύο πραττόμενα; Psellus, <i>Quaenam sunt Graecorum opiniones de daemonibus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 39. <abbr>ed.</abbr> J. F. Boissonade, τὰ δέ γε μυστήρια τούτων, οἷα αὐτίκα τὰ Ἐλευσίνια, τὸν μυθικὸν ὑποκρίνεται Δία μιγνύμενον τῇ Δηοῖ, ἤγουν τῇ Δήμητρι⁠ ⁠… Ὕποκρίνεται δὲ καὶ τὰς τῆς Δηοῦς ὠδῖνας. Ἱκετηρίαι γοῦν αὐτίκα Δηοῦς καὶ χολῆς πόσις καὶ καρδιαλγίαι. Ἐφ’ οἷς καί τι τραγοσκελὲς μίμημα παθαινόμενον περὶ τοῖς διδύμοις, ὅτιπερ ὁ Ζεύς, δίκας ἀποτιννὺς τῆς βίας τῇ Δήμητρι, τράγου ὄρχεις ἀποτεμών, τῷ κόλπῳ ταύτης κατέθετο ὥσπερ δὴ καὶ ἑαυτοῦ (compare Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 20⁠–⁠23); Schol. on Plato, <i>Gorgias</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 497 c, Ἐτελεῖτο δὲ ταῦτα (the Eleusinian mysteries) καὶ Δηοῖ καὶ Κορῇ, ὅτι ταύτην μὲν Πλούτων ἁρπάξειε, Δηοῖ δὲ μιγείη Ζεύς; Hippolytus, <i>Refutatio omnium haeresium</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 8, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162, 164, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Duncker and Schneidewin, Λέγουσι δὲ αύτον (God), φησί, Φρύγες καὶ χλοερὸν στάχυν τεθερισμένον, καὶ μετὰ τοὺς Φρύγας Ἀθηναῖοι μυοῦντες Ἐλευσίνια, καὶ ἐπιδεικνύντες τοῖς ἐποπτεύουσι τὸ μέγα καὶ θαυμαστὸν καὶ τελειότατον ἐποπτικὸν ἐκεῖ μυστήριον ἐν σιωπῇ, τεθερισμένον στάχυν. Ὁ δὲ στάχυς οὗτός ἐστι καὶ παρὰ Ἀθηναίοις ὁ παρὰ τοῦ ἀχαρακτηρίστου φωστὴρ τέλειος μέγας, καθάπερ αὐτὸς ὁ ἱεροφάντης, οὐκ ἀποκεκομμένος μέν, ὡς ὁ Ἄττις, εὐνουχισμένος δὲ διὰ κωνείου καὶ πᾶσαν παρῃτημένος τὴν σαρκικὴν γένεσιν, νυκτὸς ἐν Ἐλευσῖνι ὑπὸ πολλῷ πυρὶ τελῶν τὰ μεγάλα καὶ ἄρρητα μυστήρια βοᾷ καὶ κέκραγε λέγων· ἱερὸν ἔτεκε πότνια κοῦρον Βριμὼ Βριμόν, τουτέστιν ἰσχυρὰ ἰσχυρόν. In combining and interpreting this fragmentary evidence I have followed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> P. Foucart (<i>Recherches sur l’origine et la nature des mystères d’Eleusis</i>, Paris, 1895, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Les Grands Mystères d’Eleusis</i>, Paris, 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69), and Miss J. E. Harrison (<i>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 549 <i>sqq.</i>). In antiquity it was believed that an ointment or plaster of hemlock applied to the genital organs prevented them from discharging their function. See Dioscorides, <i>De materia medica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 79; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. 154. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> J. B. Bradbury, Downing Professor of Medicine in the University of Cambridge, informs me that this belief is correct. “Although <i>conium</i> [hemlock] is not used as an anaphrodisiac at the present day, there can be no doubt that it has this effect. When rubbed into the skin it depresses sensory nerve-endings and is absorbed. After absorption it depresses all sympathetic nerve-cells. Both these effects would tend to diminish organic reflexes such as aphrodisia” (<abbr>Dr.</abbr> W. E. Dixon, Pharmacological Laboratory, Cambridge). Pausanias seems to imply that the hierophant was forbidden to marry (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 14. 1). It may have been so in his age, the second century of our era; but an inscription of the first century <span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr></span> shews that at that time it was lawful for him to take a wife. See P. Foucart, <i>Les Grands Mystères d’Eleusis</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <i>sqq.</i> (extract from the <i>Mémoires de l’Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 3; Plutarch, quoted by Eusebius, <i>Praepar. Evang.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_64">64</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_66">66</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 177.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 177 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 318 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 178.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Hone, <i>Every Day Book</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 595 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 178.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>With regard to Zeus as an oak-god see below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_358">358</a> <i>sq.</i> Hera appears with an oak-tree and her sacred bird the peacock perched on it in a group which is preserved in the Palazzo degli Conservatori at Rome. In the same group Pallas is represented with her olive-tree and her owl; so that the conjunction of the oak with Hera cannot be accidental. See W. Helbig, <i>Führer durch die öffentlichen Sammlungen klassischen Altertümer in Rom</i> 2nd Ed., (Leipsic, 1899), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 397, <abbr>No.</abbr> 587.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 42.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>At Cnossus in Crete, Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 72; at Samos, Lactantius, <i>Instit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 17 (compare Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 7); at Athens, Photius, <i>Lexicon</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> ἱερὸν γάμον; <i>Etymologicum Magnum</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> ἱερομνήμονες, <abbr>p.</abbr> 468. 52. A fragment of Pherecydes relating to the marriage of Zeus and Hera came to light some years ago. See Grenfell and Hunt, <i>New Classical and other Greek and Latin Papyri</i> (Oxford, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; H. Weil, in <i>Revue des Études grecques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠9. The subject has been discussed by W. H. Roscher (<i>Juno und Hera</i>, Leipsic, 1875, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72 <i>sqq.</i>). From the wide prevalence of the rite he infers that the custom of the sacred marriage was once common to all the Greek tribes.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 347 <i>sqq.</i> Hera was worshipped under the title of Flowery at Argos (Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 22. 1; compare <i>Etymol. Magn.</i> <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Ἄνθεια, <abbr>p.</abbr> 108, line 48), and women called Flower-bearers served in her sanctuary (Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 78). A great festival of gathering flowers was celebrated by Peloponnesian women in spring (Hesychius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> ἠροσάνθεια, compare Photius, <i>Lexicon</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Ἠροάνθια). The first of May is still a festival of flowers in Peloponnese. See <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 518 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 176; P. Herrmann, <i>Nordische Mythologie</i> (Leipsic, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 198 <i>sqq.</i>, 217, 520, 529; E. H. Meyer, <i>Mythologie der Germanen</i> (Strasburg, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 366 <i>sq.</i> The procession of Frey and his wife in the waggon is doubtless the same with the procession of Nerthus in a waggon which Tacitus describes (<i>Germania</i>, 40). Nerthus seems to be no other than Freya, the wife of Frey. See the commentators on Tacitus, <i>l.c.</i>, and especially K. Müllenhoff, <i>Deutsche Altertumskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (Berlin, 1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 468 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gregory of Tours, <i>De gloria confessorum</i>, 77 (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Latina</i>, lxxi. col. 884). Compare Sulpicius Severus, <i>Vita S. Martini</i>, 12: “<i>Quia esset haec Gallorum rusticis consuetudo, simulacra daemonum candido tecta velamine misera per agros suos circumferre dementia</i>.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Passio Sancti Symphoriani,” chs. 2 and 6 (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Graeca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1463, 1466).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>These crazy wretches castrate men and mutilate women. Hence they are known as the Skoptsy (“mutilated”). See N. Tsakni, <i>La Russie sectaire</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 74 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to this feature in the ritual of Cybele, see <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 219 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Max Buch, <i>Die Wotjäken</i> (Stuttgart, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 137.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. A. Gait, in <i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 190.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. J. de Arriaga, <i>Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lacombe, in <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1869) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 359 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Relations des Jésuites, 1636</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 109, and <i>1639</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 95 (Canadian reprint); Charlevoix, <i>Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 225; Chateaubriand, <i>Voyage en Amérique</i> (Paris, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 140⁠–⁠142.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> F. Hahn, “Some Notes on the Religion and Superstitions of the Orāos,” <i>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, lxxii. part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Calcutta, 1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 12. For another account of the ceremonies held by the Oraons in spring see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_76">76</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Rascher, “Die Sulka,” <i>Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 217.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 118.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 138.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Ellis, <i>The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 139⁠–⁠142.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 677.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From notes sent to me by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. C. Hollis, 21st May 1908.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Scott and J. P. Hardiman, <i>Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Rangoon, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 439.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. W. Lane, <i>Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians</i> (Paisley and London, 1895), chap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 500. The authority for the statement is the Arab historian Makrizi.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The North China Herald</i>, 4th May 1906, <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. A. Wilken, “Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel,” <i>De Indische Gids</i>, June 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 994 (referring to Veth, <i>Het eiland Timor</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 21); A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 11.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Berlin, 1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 134.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Voyages d’Ibn Batoutah, texte arabe, accompagné d’une traduction</i>, par C. Defrémery et B. R. Sanguinetti (Paris, 1853⁠–⁠1858), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 126⁠–⁠130.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Thanda Pulayans, on the west coast of India, think that the phosphorescence on the surface of the sea indicates the presence of the spirits of their ancestors, who are fishing in the backwaters. See E. Thurston, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 293. Similarly the Sulkas of New Britain fancy that the mysterious glow comes from souls bathing in the water. See P. Rascher, “Die Sulka,” <i>Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 216.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For a list of these tales, with references to the authorities, see my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 26. 7. To the examples there referred to add I. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Zingerle, <i>Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus Tirol</i>, Nos. 8, 21, 35, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35 <i>sqq.</i>, 100 <i>sqq.</i>, 178 <i>sqq.</i>; G. F. Abbott, <i>Macedonian Folk-lore</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270 <i>sqq.</i> This type of story has been elaborately investigated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> E. S. Hartland (<i>The Legend of Perseus</i>, London, 1894⁠–⁠1896), but he has not discussed the custom of the sacred marriage, on which the story seems to be founded.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 10. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 226 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Salvado, <i>Mémoires historiques sur l’Australie</i> (Paris, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Ternaux-Compans, <i>Essai sur l’ancien Cundinamarca</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Coudreau, <i>Chez nos Indiens</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 303 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Lumholtz, <i>Unknown Mexico</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 57.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Lumholtz, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 402 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. I. Fairclough, “Notes on the Basutos,” <i>Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 14, January 1905, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To the examples given in my note on Pausanias <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 7. 2, add Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46, 50; “De Dajaks op Borneo,” <i>Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 72; A. D’Orbigny, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 93, 160 (see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_16">16</a> <i>sq.</i>); F. Blumentritt, “Über die Eingeborenen der Insel Palawan und der Inselgruppe der Talamianen,” <i>Globus</i>, lix. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 167; W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 46; Father Guillemé, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, lx. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 252.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. F. W. Owen, <i>Narrative of Voyages to explore the Shores of Africa, Arabia, and Madagascar</i> (London, 1833), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 354 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Goldie, <i>Calabar and its Mission</i>, New Edition (Edinburgh and London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Guillemé, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, lx. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 253.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 327 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Aymonier, “Les Tchames et leurs religions,” <i>Revue de l’histoire des religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 213.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Robertson Smith, <i>Religion of the Semites</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 96⁠–⁠104.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. I. Curtiss, <i>Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i> (Chicago, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 117.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. I. Curtiss, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 50 <i>sq.</i>, 225 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>., <i>Punjab</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 425. As to the sect of the Maharajas, see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 406 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. I. Curtiss, <i>Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 116 <i>sq.</i>; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> H. H. Spoer, “The Powers of Evil in Jerusalem,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 55; A. Jaussen, <i>Coutumes des Arabes au pays de Moab</i> (Paris, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 360.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. M. Mackinlay, <i>Folk-lore of Scottish Lochs and Springs</i> (Glasgow, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 112.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Haddon and C. R. Browne, “The Ethnography of the Aran Islands,” <i>Proceedings of the Royal Irish Academy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 819.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. C. Hope, <i>The Legendary Lore of the Holy Wells of England</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 122.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. C. Hope, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 107 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 15. 5, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 7. 2 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 22. 9, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 23. 1 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 43. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 1. 1 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 34. 6 and 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sophocles, <i>Trachiniae</i>, 6 <i>sqq.</i> The combat of Hercules with the bull-shaped river-god in presence of Dejanira is the subject of a red-figured vase painting. See Miss J. E. Harrison, <i>Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion</i> 2nd Ed., (Cambridge, 1908), Fig. 133, <abbr>p.</abbr> 434.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aeschines, <i>Epist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. The letters of Aeschines are spurious, but there is no reason to doubt that the custom here described was actually observed.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See the evidence collected by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Floyd G. Ballentine, “Some Phases of the Cult of the Nymphs,” <i>Harvard Studies in Classical Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Panzer, <i>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 107⁠–⁠110, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 550. At Ragusa in Sicily an enormous effigy of a dragon, with movable tail and eyes, is carried in procession on <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Day (April 23rd); and along with it two huge sugar loaves, decorated with flowers, figure in the procession. At the end of the festival these loaves are broken into little bits, and every farmer puts one of the pieces in his sowed fields to ensure a good crop. See G. Pitrè, <i>Feste patronali in Sicilia</i> (Turin and Palermo, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 323 <i>sq.</i> In this custom the fertility charm remains, though the marriage ceremony appears to be absent. As to the mummers’ play of <abbr>St.</abbr> George, see E. K. Chambers, <i>The Mediaeval Stage</i> (Oxford, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 205 <i>sqq.</i>; A. Beatty, “The <abbr>St.</abbr> George, or Mummers’, Plays,” <i>Transactions of the Wisconsin Academy of Sciences, Arts, and Letters</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (October, 1906) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 273⁠–⁠324. A separate copy of the latter work was kindly sent to me by the author.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See F. N. Taillepied, <i>Recueil des Antiquitez et singularitez de la ville de Rouen</i> (Rouen, 1587), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 93⁠–⁠105; A. Floquet, <i>Histoire du privilége de Saint Romain</i> (2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> 8vo, Rouen, 1833). Briefer notices of the custom and legend will be found in A. Bosquet’s <i>La Normandie romanesque et merveilleuse</i> (Paris and Rouen, 1845), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 405⁠–⁠409; and A. de Nore’s <i>Coutumes, mythes, et traditions des provinces de France</i> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 245⁠–⁠250. The gilt <i>fierte</i>, or portable shrine of <abbr>St.</abbr> Romain, is preserved in the Chapter Library of the Cathedral at Rouen, where I saw it in May 1902. It is in the form of a chapel, on the roof of which the saint stands erect, trampling on the winged dragon, while the condemned prisoner kneels in front of him. This, however, is not the original shrine, which was so decayed that in 1776 the Chapter decided to replace it by another. See Floquet, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 338⁠–⁠346. The custom of carrying the dragons in procession was stopped in 1753 because of its tendency to impair the solemnity of the ceremony (Floquet, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 301). Even more famous than the dragon of Rouen was the dragon of Tarascon, an effigy of which used to be carried in procession on Whitsunday. See A. de Nore, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 47 <i>sqq.</i> As to other French dragons see P. Sébillot, <i>Le Folk-lore de France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 468⁠–⁠470.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Catullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. 9 <i>sqq</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wernicke, in Pauly-Wissowa, <i>Real-Encyklopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. coll. 1343, 1351.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>De fortuna Romanorum</i>, 9. This statement would be strongly confirmed by etymology if we could be sure that, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook has suggested, the name Egeria is derived from a root <i>aeg</i> meaning “oak.” The name is spelt <i>Aegeria</i> by Valerius Maximus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2. 1). See A. B. Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 366; <i>id</i>. “The European Sky-God,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 283 <i>sq.</i>; and as to the root <i>aeg</i> see O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Atertumskunde</i> (Strasburg, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Querquetulanae,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260, 261, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_380">380</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 466.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 54; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 232; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 2. 11, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 24. 7; Lucian, <i>Bis accusatus</i>, 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 18.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_130">130</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The first, I believe, to point out a parallelism in detail between Rome and Aricia was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 376 <i>sqq.</i>); but from the similarity he inferred the humanity of the Arician priests rather than the divinity of the Roman kings. A fuller consideration of all the evidence has since led him, rightly as I conceive, to reverse the inference. See his articles “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>The Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 360⁠–⁠375; “The European Sky-God,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260⁠–⁠332. In the first and second editions of this work I had suggested that the <i>regifugium</i> at Rome may have been a relic of a rule of succession to the throne like that which obtained at Nemi. The following discussion of the religious position of the old Latin kings owes much to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook’s sagacity and learning, of which he freely imparted to me.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 61 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 74, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 35; B. G. Niebuhr, <i>History of Rome</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 36; Th. Mommsen, <i>History of Rome</i>, New Edition (London, 1894), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 83; A. J. H. Greenidge, <i>Roman Public Life</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 44 <i>sq.</i> But Mommsen, while he held that the costume of a Roman god and of the Roman king was the same, denied that the king personated the god. A truer historical insight is displayed by K. O. Müller in his treatment of the subject (<i>Die Etrusker</i>, Stuttgart, 1877, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 348 <i>sq.</i>). For a discussion of the evidence see Th. Mommsen, <i>Römisches Staatsrecht</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 372 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5 <i>sq.</i>; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 566 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 507 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Privatleben der Römer</i>, 2nd Ed., 542 <i>sq.</i>; K. O. Müller, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 344⁠–⁠350, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 198⁠–⁠200; Aust, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Juppiter,” in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. coll. 633, 725⁠–⁠728. Among the chief passages of ancient authors on the subject are Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>ll.cc.</i>; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 2. 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 220; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 40; Appian, <i>Pun.</i> 66; Zonaras, <i>Annal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 8 and 21; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 8. 1 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 23. 4 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 41. 2, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 7. 9 <i>sq.</i>; Florus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 5. 6; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 195, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 127, 130, 137, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. 11. 111 <i>sq.</i>; Juvenal, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 36⁠–⁠43; Ovid, <i>Ex Ponto</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 57 <i>sq.</i>; Macrobius, <i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 6. 7⁠–⁠9; Servius on Virgil, <i>Ecl.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 22, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 27; Ael. Lampridius, <i>Alexander Severus</i>, 40. 8; <abbr>Jul.</abbr> Capitolinus, <i>Gordiani tres</i>, 4. 4; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 6. 5⁠–⁠7; Tertullian, <i>De corona militis</i>, 13. The fullest descriptions of a Roman triumph are those of Appian and Zonaras (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 21).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Camillus triumphed in a chariot drawn by white horses like the sacred white horses of Jupiter and the Sun. His Republican contemporaries were offended at what they regarded as a too close imitation of the gods (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 23. 5 <i>sq.</i>; Plutarch, <i>Camillus</i>, 7; Dio Cassius, lii. 13); but the Roman emperors followed his example, or perhaps revived the old custom of the kings. See Dio Cassius, xliii. 14; Suetonius, <i>Nero</i>, 25; Pliny, <i>Panegyric</i>, 22; Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 32; Ovid, <i>Ars amat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 214. On the sanctity of white horses among various branches of the Aryan stock, see J. von Negelein, “Die volksthümliche Bedeutung der weissen Farbe,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62⁠–⁠66; W. Ridgeway, <i>The Origin and Influence of the Thoroughbred Horse</i> (Cambridge, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 105, 186, 187, 294, 295, 419. As to the horses of the Sun, see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 315 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tertullian, <i>De corona militis</i>, 13, “<i>Coronant et publicos ordines laureis publicae causae magistratus vero insuper aureis. Praeferuntur etiam illis Hetruscae. Hoc vocabulum est coronarum, quas gemmis et foliis ex auro quercinis ob Jovem insignes ad deducendas thensas cum palmatis togis sumunt.</i>” The <i>thensae</i> were the sacred cars in which the images of the gods were carried at the procession of the Circensian games (see W. Smith’s <i>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities</i>, 3rd Ed., <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i>). That the Etruscan crown described by Tertullian was the golden crown held by a slave over the head of a general on his triumph may be inferred from Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. 11, “<i>Vulgoque sic triumphabant, et cum corona ex auro Etrusca sustineretur a tergo, anulus tamen in digito ferreus erat aeque triumphantis et servi fortasse coronam sustinentis.</i>” Compare Zonaras, <i>Annal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 21; Juvenal, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 38 <i>sqq.</i> Mommsen says that the triumphal golden crown was made in the shape of laurel leaves (<i>Römisches Staatsrecht</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3rd Ed., 427); but none of the ancient authors cited by him appears to affirm this, with the exception of Aulus Gellius (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 6. 5⁠–⁠7, “<i>Triumphales coronae sunt aureae, quae imperatoribus ob honorem triumphi mittuntur. Id vulgo dicitur aurum coronarium. Haec antiquitus e lauru erant, post fieri ex aura coeptae</i>”). Gellius may have confused the wreath of real laurel which the general wore on his head (Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. 127, 130, 137) with the golden crown which was held over him by a slave. The two crowns are clearly distinguished by Zonaras (<i>l.c.</i>), though he does not describe the shape of the golden crown. Thus there is no good ground for rejecting the express testimony of Tertullian that the golden crown was shaped like oak-leaves. This seems to have been Mommsen’s own earlier opinion, since he mentions “a chaplet of oaken leaves in gold” as part of the insignia of the Roman kings (<i>Roman History</i>, London, 1894, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 83).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. 111 <i>sq.</i>; Servius on Virgil, <i>Ecl.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 22, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 27.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 2. 6, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 26. 11, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 39. 6. For other examples of idols painted red see my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 2. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For instances see <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kunstmann, “Valentin Ferdinand’s Beschreibung der Serra Leoa,” <i>Abhandlungen d. histor. Classe d. kön. Bayer. Akademie d. Wissenschaften</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (Munich, 1866) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131; J. B. Labat, <i>Relation historique de l’Éthiopie Occidentale</i> (Paris, 1732), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 250; Gmelin, <i>Reise durch Sibirien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 476; “Ueber den religiösen Glauben und die Ceremonien der heidnischen Samojeden im Kreise Mesen,” <i>Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, N.F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1860) <abbr>p.</abbr> 59; E. Rae, <i>The White Sea Peninsula</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 150; J. B. Müller, “Les Mœurs et usages des Ostiackes,” <i>Recueil de voiages au Nord</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (Amsterdam, 1727) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 414 <i>sq.</i>; Delamare, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1840) <abbr>p.</abbr> 482; Sahagun, <i>Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</i> (Paris, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 185; J. de Velasco, <i>Histoire du royaume de Quito</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 121 (Ternaux-Compans, <i>Voyages, relations et mémoires</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>., Paris, 1840); E. J. Payne, <i>History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 374 n. 1; F. B. Jevons, <i>Introduction to the History of Religion</i> (London, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 158. Often we are merely told that the blood is smeared or sprinkled on the image. See A. B. Ellis, <i>Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 42, 79; <i>id.</i>, <i>Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 102, 106; A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, <i>British Nigeria</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 255; <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kramer, “Der Götzendienst der Niasser,” <i>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 496. For more examples see my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 2. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 3; Phaedrus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 17. 1 <i>sqq.</i>; Servius on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 332, and on <i>Ecl.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 17.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 10. 4 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 92.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Tristia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 31 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dio Cassius, liii. 19.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 607 <i>sqq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 953 <i>sq.</i> Tiberius refused a similar honour (Suetonius, <i>Tiberius</i>, 26); but Domitian seems to have accepted it (Martial, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 82. 7). Two statues of Claudius, one in the Vatican, the other in the Lateran Museum, represent the emperor as Jupiter wearing the oak crown (W. Helbig, <i>Führer durch die öffentlichen Sammlungen klassischer Altertümer in Rom</i>, 2nd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. Nos. 312, 673).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 6981.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Overbeck, <i>Griechische Kunstmythologie</i>, Besonderer Theil, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 232 <i>sqq.</i>; L. R. Farnell, <i>The Cults of the Greek States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 107 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antoninus Liberalis, <i>Transform.</i> 6. For this and the two following passages of Tzetzes I am indebted to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook. See further his articles, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 409; “The European Sky-god,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Ebeling, <i>Lexicon Homericum</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vv</span>.</i> βασιλεύς, διοτρεφής, and θεῖος.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Tzetzes, <i>Antehomerica</i>, 102 <i>sq.</i>:<br/>
					<div class="c007 lg-container-b"><div class="linegroup"><div class="group"><div class="line">οἱ πρὶν γάρ τε Δίας πάντας κάλεον βασιλῆας,</div> <div class="line">οὕνεκά μιν καλὸς Διὸς ἀστὴρ σκῆπτρον ὀπάζει.</div></div></div></div> <p class="c008"><i>id.</i>, <i>Chiliades</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 474:</p> <div class="c007 lg-container-b"><div class="linegroup"><div class="group"><div class="line">τοὺς βασιλεῖς δ’ ἀνέκαθε Δίας ἐκάλουν πάντας.</div></div></div></div> <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 53 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the situation, see Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 66; H. Nissen, <i>Italische Landeskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 582 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 772. I have to thank <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook for directing my attention to the Alban kings and their interesting legends. See his articles “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363 <i>sq.</i>; “The European Sky-god,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 285 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 760 <i>sqq.</i>, with the commentary of Servius; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3. 6 <i>sqq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 609 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 39 <i>sqq.</i>; Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Silvi,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 340, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Aurelius Victor, <i>Origo gentis Romanae</i>, 15⁠–⁠17; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 70; Diodorus Siculus, in Eusebius, <i>Chronic.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. coll. 285, 287, <abbr>ed.</abbr> A. Schoene; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3a and 3b, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 110⁠–⁠112, <abbr>ed.</abbr> L. Dindorf (Teubner edition); Joannes Lydus, <i>De magistratibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 21. As to the derivation of the name Julus, see Aurelius Victor, <i>op. cit.</i> 15, “<i>Igitur Latini Ascanium ob insignem virtutem non solum Jove ortum crediderunt, sed etiam per diminutionem, declinato paululum nomine, primo Jobum, dein postea Julum appellarant</i>”; also Steuding, in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 574. Compare W. M. Lindsay, <i>The Latin Language</i> (Oxford, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 250. According to Diodorus, the priesthood bestowed on Julus was the pontificate; but the name Julus or Little Jupiter suggests that the office was rather that of Flamen Dialis, who was a sort of living embodiment of Jupiter (see below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 191 <i>sq.</i>), and whose name of <i>Dialis</i> is derived from the same root as Julus. On the Julii and their relation to Vejovis see R. H. Klausen, <i>Aeneas und die Penaten</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1059 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_1">1</a>, and <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 44.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 2387; L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 263 <i>sq.</i> On Vejovis as the Little Jupiter see Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Vesculi,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 379, “<i>Ve enim syllabam rei parvae praeponebant, unde Veiovem parvum Iovem et vegrandem fabam minutam dicebant</i>”; also Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 429⁠–⁠448. At Rome the sanctuary of Vejovis was on the saddle between the two peaks of the Capitoline hill (Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 12. 1 <i>sq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 429 <i>sq.</i>); thus he appropriately dwelt on the same hill as the Great Jupiter, but lower down the slope. On coins of the Gargilian, Ogulnian and Vergilian houses Vejovis is represented by a youthful beardless head, crowned with oak. See E. Babelon, <i>Monnaies de la République Romaine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 532, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 266, 529. On other Republican coins his head is crowned with laurel. See E. Babelon, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 77, 505⁠–⁠508, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 6, 8. Circensian games were held at Bovillae in honour of the Julian family, and Tiberius dedicated a chapel to them there. See Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 41, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 23.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Caesar,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 57, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller. Other but less probable explanations of the name are suggested by Aelius Spartianus (<i>Helius</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 3 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the Frankish kings see Agathias, <i>Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3; J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 368 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Roman.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 71; Diodorus Siculus, in Eusebius, <i>Chronic.</i> bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. coll. 287, 289, <abbr>ed.</abbr> A. Schoene; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3a and 4, <abbr>ed.</abbr> L. Dindorf; Zonaras, <i>Annal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 1; Aurelius Victor, <i>Origo gentis Romanae</i>, 18; Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 616⁠–⁠618; <i>id.</i>, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 50; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3. 9. The king is called Romulus by Livy, Remulus by Ovid, Aremulus by Aurelius Victor, Amulius by Zonaras, Amulius or Arramulius by Diodorus, and Allodius by Dionysius. A tale of a city submerged in the Alban lake is still current in the neighbourhood. See the English translators’ note to Niebuhr’s <i>History of Rome</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 200. Similar stories are told in many lands. See my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 24. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 342 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 140, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. 13 <i>sq.</i> Other writers speak only of Numa’s skill in expiating the prodigy or evil omen of thunderbolts. See Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 20. 7; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 285⁠–⁠348; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 15; Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1⁠–⁠4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248, 251.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 7; Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 592 <i>sqq.</i>; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 140, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. 14 (referring to the first book of L. Piso’s <i>Annals</i>); Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 31. 8; Aurelius Victor, <i>De viris illustribus</i>, 4; Zonaras, <i>Annal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 6. According to another account Tullus Hostilius was murdered by his successor Ancus Martius during a violent storm (Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 35; Zonaras, <i>l.c.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2. 6; Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 598⁠–⁠608; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 56; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 64; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 259; Aurelius Victor, <i>Origo gentis Romanae</i>, 14. Only the last writer mentions the thunderstorm.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 16; Cicero, <i>De legibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 3; <i>id.</i>, <i>De re publica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 16. 25, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 10. 20; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 475⁠–⁠512; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 27 <i>sq.</i>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 56 and 63; Zonaras, <i>Annal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 4; Aurelius Victor, <i>De viris illustribus</i>, 2; Florus, <i>Epitoma</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 16⁠–⁠18. From Cicero (<i>De legibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 3) we learn that the apparition of Romulus to Proculus Julius took place near the spot where the house of Atticus afterwards stood, and from Cornelius Nepos (<i>Atticus</i>, 13. 2) we know that Atticus had an agreeable villa and shady garden on the Quirinal. As to the temple of Quirinus see also Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 51; Festus, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 254, 255, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 120. As to the site of the temple and the question whether it was identical with the temple dedicated by L. Papirius Cursor in 293 <span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr></span> (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 46. 7; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 213) see O. Richter, <i>Topographie der Stadt Rom</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 286 <i>sqq.</i>; G. Wissowa, <i>Gesammelte Abhandlungen</i> (Munich, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 144 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See A. B. Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 368 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i> “The European Sky-god,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 281. But a serious argument against the proposed derivation of Quirinus from <i>quercus</i> is that, as I am informed by my learned philological friend the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Prof.</abbr> J. H. Moulton, it is inconsistent with the much more probable derivation of Perkunas from <i>quercus</i>. See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_367">367</a>, note 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. I. Molina, <i>Geographical, Natural, and Civil History of Chili</i> (London, 1809), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 92 <i>sq.</i> The savage Conibos of the Ucayali river in eastern Peru imagine that thunder is the voice of the dead (W. Smyth and F. Lowe, <i>Journey from Lima to Para</i>, London, 1836, <abbr>p.</abbr> 240); and among them when parents who have lost a child within three months hear thunder, they go and dance on the grave, howling turn about (De <abbr>St.</abbr> Cricq, “Voyage du Pérou au Brésil,” <i>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i>, ivme série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>., Paris, 1853, <abbr>p.</abbr> 294). The Yuracares of eastern Peru threaten the thunder-god with their arrows and defy him when he thunders (A. D’Orbigny, <i>L’Homme américain</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 365), just as the Thracians did of old (Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 94). So the Kayans of Borneo, on hearing a peal of thunder, have been seen to grasp their swords for the purpose of keeping off the demon who causes it (A. W. Nieuwenhuis, <i>In Centraal Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 140 <i>sq.</i>, 146 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 310; and for the connexion of the rite with Jupiter Elicius see O. Gilbert, <i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 154 <i>sq.</i>; Aust, in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 657 <i>sq.</i> As to the connexion of Jupiter with the rain-making ceremony (<i>aquaelicium</i>), the combined evidence of Petronius (<i>Sat.</i> 44) and Tertullian (<i>Apologeticus</i>, 40) seems to me conclusive.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 637 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 183 <i>sqq.</i>; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 28. 4 <i>sq.</i>; Cicero, <i>De divinatione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 45. 101; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 21. Although the temple was not dedicated until 344 <span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr></span>, the worship of the goddess of the hill appears to have been very ancient. See H. Jordan, <i>Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 109 <i>sq.</i>; W. H. Roscher, <i>Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. coll. 592 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 8. 5; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 430; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 15.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 314⁠–⁠318, 347⁠–⁠354.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 92.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 10. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Mons Querquetulanus</i>; see Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 65.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A monument found at Rome represents Jupiter beside an oak, and underneath is the dedication: <i>Jovi Caelio</i>. See H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3080.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Porta Querquetulana</i> or <i>Querquetularia</i>; see Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 37; Festus, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260, 261, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>ll.cc.</i>; Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 49.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Babelon, <i>Monnaies de la République Romaine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 99 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 49, where, however, “<i>alii ab aesculetis</i>” is a conjecture of C. O. Müller’s. I do not know what authority O. Richter has for reading <i>aesculis consitae</i> (“planted with oaks”) for <i>excultae</i> in this passage (<i>Topographie der Stadt Rom</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 302, n. 4). Modern topographers prefer to derive the name from <i>ex-colere</i> in the sense of “the hill outside the city” (O. Richter, <i>l.c.</i>; O. Gilbert, <i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 166 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_182">182</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 295 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 18; and for the identification, O. Gilbert, <i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 152 <i>sqq.</i>; A. B. Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <i>De divinatione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 45, 101.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Boni, in <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, May 1900, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161, 172; <i>id.</i>, <i>Aedes Vestae</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 14 (extract from the <i>Nuova Antologia</i>, 1st August 1900). Copies of these and other papers containing Commendatore Boni’s account of his memorable excavations and discoveries were kindly given me by him during my stay in Rome in the winter of 1900⁠–⁠1901. That the fire in question was a sacrificial one is proved by the bones, potsherds, and rude copper money found among the ashes. Commend. Boni thinks that the charred remains of the wood prove that the fire was extinguished, probably by libations, and that therefore it cannot have been the perpetual holy fire of Vesta, which would have burned up completely all the fuel. But a new fire was annually lit on the first of March (Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 143 <i>sq.</i>; Macrobius, <i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 12. 6), which may imply that the old fire was ceremonially extinguished, as often happens in such cases.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 37.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Richter, <i>Topographie der Stadt Rom</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 211.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 237. The inscription was probably not in the Etruscan language, but only in an archaic alphabet like that employed in the inscription on the pyramidal stone which has been found under the Black Stone in the Forum.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Boni, “Bimbi Romulei,” <i>Nuova Antologia</i>, 16th February 1904, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5 <i>sqq.</i> (separate reprint); E. Burton-Brown, <i>Recent Excavations in the Roman Forum</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 150.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Oscillantes,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 194, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 49; A. Schwegler, <i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 341; H. Nissen, <i>Italische Landeskunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 580. It is to be observed that Dionysius does not here speak of the dedication of a temple to Jupiter; when he describes the foundation of the temple of Capitoline Jupiter by Tarquin (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 59 and 61) his language is quite different. The monastery, founded in 1777 by Cardinal York, the last of the Stuarts, has now been converted into a meteorological station and an inn (K. Baedeker, <i>Central Italy and Rome</i>, 13th Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 400). It is fitting enough that the atmospheric phenomena should be observed by modern science on the spot where they were worshipped by ancient piety.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 31. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to tradition, the future site of Alba Longa was marked out by a white sow and her litter, which were found lying under evergreen oaks (Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 43), as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook has pointed out (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 363). The tradition seems to shew that the neighbourhood of the city was wooded with oaks.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_380">380</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Querquetulani. See Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 69; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 61. As to the white bulls sacrificed at the great Latin festival and partaken of by the members of the League, see Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 68; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 49. Compare Cicero, <i>Pro Plancio</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 23; Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 25.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>Histor. plant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 8. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 68; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. 10. 7; Ovid, <i>Ex Ponto</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 4. 31; Servius on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 146; Horace, <i>Carmen Saeculare</i>, 49.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 250 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Italic and Keltic are so closely bound together by important phonetic and morphological affinities that they are sometimes spoken of as one branch” of Aryan speech (J. H. Moulton, <i>Two Lectures on the Science of Language</i>, Cambridge, 1903, <abbr>p.</abbr> 6, note). “The connection of the Celtic and Italic languages is structural. It is much deeper than that of Celts and Teutons, and goes back to an earlier epoch. Celts and Latins must have dwelt together as an undivided people in the valley of the Danube, and it must have been at a much later time⁠—after the Umbrians and Latins had crossed the Alps⁠—that the contact of Celts and Teutons came about” (Isaac Taylor, <i>The Origin of the Aryans</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 192; compare <i>id.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 257). See also P. Giles, <i>Manual of Comparative Philology</i> 2nd Ed., (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 26.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, xlii. 7. 1, xlv. 15. 10. Compare Dio Cassius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. 20. 1. The temple on the Alban Mount was dedicated in 168 <span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr></span>, but the worship was doubtless far older.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_176">176</a>, <a href="#Page_184">184</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 7. 12, <abbr>p.</abbr> 329; Hyperides, <i>Or.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. coll. 35⁠–⁠37, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 43 <i>sq.</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Blass; G. Curtius, <i>Griech. Etymologie</i>, 5th Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 236; W. H. Roscher, <i>Juno und Hera</i> (Leipsic, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. coll. 576, 578 <i>sq.</i> See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_381">381</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_140">140</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. H. Roscher, <i>Juno und Hera</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 575 <i>sq.</i>, 591 <i>sqq.</i> At Falerii the image of Juno was annually carried in procession from her sacred grove, and in some respects the ceremony resembled a marriage procession (Ovid, <i>Amores</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 13; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 21). The name of June was <i>Junius</i> at Rome, <i>Junonius</i> at Aricia, Laurentum and Lavinia, and <i>Junonalis</i> at Tibur and Praeneste (Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 59⁠–⁠63; Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 12. 30). The forms <i>Junonius</i> and <i>Junonalis</i> are recognised by Festus (<abbr>p.</abbr> 103, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller). Their existence among the Latins seems to render the derivation of <i>Junius</i> from Juno quite certain, though that derivation is doubted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Warde Fowler (<i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 99 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 101⁠–⁠168; Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 12. 31⁠–⁠33; Tertullian, <i>Ad nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 9; Varro, quoted by Nonius Marcellus, <i>De compendiosa doctrina</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 390, <abbr>ed.</abbr> L. Quicherat. There was a sacred beechen grove of Diana on a hill called Corne near Tusculum (Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 242). But <i>Corne</i> has probably no connection with <i>Carna</i>. The grove of Helernus was crowded with worshippers on the first of February (Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 67, where <i>Helerni</i> is a conjectural emendation for <i>Averni</i> or <i>Asyli</i>). Nothing else is known about Helernus, unless with Merkel (in his edition of Ovid’s <i>Fasti</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> cxlviii. <i>sq.</i>) we read <i>Elerno</i> for <i>Eterno</i> in Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 93, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller. In that case it would seem that black oxen were sacrificed to him. From the association of Carna with Janus it was inferred by Merkel (<i>l.c.</i>) that the grove of Helernus stood on or near the Janiculum, where there was a grove of oaks (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186). But the language of Ovid (<i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 67) points rather to the mouth of the Tiber.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 129⁠–⁠168. A Roman bride on the way to her husband’s house was preceded by a boy bearing a torch of buckthorn (<i>spina alba</i>, Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Patrimi,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 245, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Varro, quoted by Nonius Marcellus, <i>De compendiosa doctrina</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Fax,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 116, <abbr>ed.</abbr> L. Quicherat). The intention probably was to defend her from enchantment and evil spirits. Branches of buckthorn were also thought to protect a house against thunderbolts (Columella, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 346 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_54">54</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dioscorides, <i>De arte medica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholiast on Nicander, <i>Theriaca</i>, 861.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diogenes Laertius, <i>Vitae philosophorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 54⁠–⁠57.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_143">143</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 111 εἰκὸς μὲν οὖν ἐστι καὶ τὸν ἱερέα τοῦ Διὸς ὥσπερ ἔμψυχον καὶ ἱερὸν ἄγαλμα καταφύξιμον ἀνεῖσθαι τοῖς δεομένοις; L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 201; F. B. Jevons, <i>Plutarch’s Romane Questions</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> lxxiii.; C. Julian, in Daremberg et Saglio, <i>Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1156 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <i>De re publica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 13. 22; Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 112; Horace, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 42 <i>sq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 37; Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 6. 7; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 21. 2, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 23. 7; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. 115; Flavius Vopiscus, <i>Probus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 7; L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 205, 284; W. H. Roscher, <i>Lexikon d. griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 600 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_179">179</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <i>Philippics</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 43. 110; Suetonius, <i>Divus Julius</i>, 76; Dio Cassius, xliv. 6. The coincidence has been pointed out by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 371).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 20. 1 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Numa was not the only Roman king who is said to have enjoyed the favours of a goddess. Romulus was married to Hersilia, who seems to have been a Sabine goddess. Ovid tells us how, when the dead Romulus had been raised to the rank of a god under the name of Quirinus, his widow Hersilia was deified as his consort. Thus, if Quirinus was a Sabine oak-god, his wife would be an oak-goddess, like Egeria. See Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 829⁠–⁠851. Compare Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 11. 2; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 14. On Hersilia as a goddess see A. Schwegler, <i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 478, note 10; L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 372. Again, of King Servius Tullius we read how the goddess Fortuna, smitten with love of him, used to enter his house nightly by a window. See Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 569 <i>sqq.</i>; Plutarch, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 36; <i>id.</i>, <i>De fortuna Romanorum</i>, 10. However, the origin and nature of Fortuna are too obscure to allow us to base any conclusions on this legend. For various more or less conjectural explanations of the goddess see W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161⁠–⁠172.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>De fortuna Romanorum</i>, 10; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 1 <i>sq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 627⁠–⁠636; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 241, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. 204; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 39; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 683; Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 18. According to the Etruscan annals, Servius Tullius was an Etruscan by name Mastarna, who came to Rome with his friend Caeles Vibenna, and, changing his name, obtained the kingdom. This was stated by the Emperor Claudius in a speech of which fragments are engraved on a bronze tablet found at Lyons. See Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Orelli, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 342. As the emperor wrote a history of Etruria in twenty books (Suetonius, <i>Divus Claudius</i>, 42) he probably had some authority for the statement, and the historical, or at least legendary, character of Mastarna and Caeles Vibenna is vouched for by a painting inscribed with their names, which was found in 1857 in an Etruscan tomb at Vulci. See G. Dennis, <i>Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 506 <i>sq.</i> But from this it by no means follows that the identification of Mastarna with Servius Tullius was correct. Schwegler preferred the Roman to the Etruscan tradition (<i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 720 <i>sq.</i>), and so, after long hesitation, did Niebuhr (<i>History of Rome</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 380 <i>sqq.</i>). It is fair to add that both these historians wrote before the discovery of the tomb at Vulci.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Schwegler, <i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 715; L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 344.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 76 <i>sq.</i>; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3 <i>sq.</i>; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 3; Zonaras, <i>Annal.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 1; Justin, xliii. 2. 1⁠–⁠3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 678.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 343.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 12, 14 and 19. Compare L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 161, 344. There was a very ancient worship of Vesta at Lavinium, the city named after Amata’s daughter Lavinia, the ancestress of the Alban kings. See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 14.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 71⁠–⁠77.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 680⁠–⁠686. We may compare the halo with which the vainglorious and rascally artist of genius, Benvenuto Cellini, declared his head to be encircled. “Ever since the time of my strange vision until now,” says he, “an aureole of glory (marvellous to relate) has rested on my head. This is visible to every sort of men to whom I have chosen to point it out; but those have been very few. This halo can be observed above my shadow in the morning from the rising of the sun for about two hours, and far better when the grass is drenched with dew. It is also visible at evening about sunset. I became aware of it in France at Paris; for the air in those parts is so much freer from mist, that one can see it there far better manifested than in Italy, mists being far more frequent among us.” See <i>The Life of Benvenuto Cellini</i>, translated by J. Addington Symonds 3rd Ed., (London, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 279 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_131">131</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. B. Ellis, The <i>Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast of West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 60. See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 149 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_229">229</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 14. 6; Schol. on Homer, <i>Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 547; J. Tzetzes, <i>Chiliades</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 669 <i>sq.</i>; Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 26. 6 <i>sq.</i>; Strabo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 1. 16, <abbr>p.</abbr> 396; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 9; <i>id.</i>, <i>Sulla</i>, 13. As to the identity of Erechtheus and Erichthonius see my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 18. 2 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 169).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 27. 3, with my note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The theory was formerly advocated by me (<i>Journal of Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154 <i>sqq.</i>) As to the duties of the Vestals see J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 342 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This explanation was first, so far as I know, given by me in my <i>Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 221. It has since been adopted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> E. Fehrle (<i>Die kultische Keuschheit im Altertum</i>, Giessen, 1910, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 210 <i>sqq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 7. 7. Compare Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 153, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Ovid</i>, Fasti, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 261 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “penus,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 250, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller, where for <i>saepius</i> we must obviously read <i>saeptus</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 199, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 183 <i>sq.</i>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 79. 11. For the situation of the hut see also Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Conon, <i>Narrationes</i>, 48; Vitruvius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 5, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Rose and Müller-Strübing; Macrobius, <i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 15. 10. Compare Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 653 <i>sq.</i> As to the two huts on the Palatine and the Capitol see A. Schwegler, <i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 394; L. Jahn on Macrobius, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 66; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 11 and 14; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 21; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 263 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Tristia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1. 29 <i>sq.</i>; Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 41.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 363. Festus, however, distinguishes the old royal palace (<i>Regia</i>) from the house of the King of the Sacred Rites (<i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Sacram viam,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 290, 293, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller). In classical times the <i>Regia</i> was the residence or office of the Pontifex Maximus; but we can hardly doubt that formerly it was the house of the <i>Rex Sacrorum</i>. See O. Gilbert, <i>Geschichte und Topographie der Stadt Rom im Altertum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 225, 235 <i>sq.</i>, 341, 344. As to the existing remains of the <i>Regia</i>, the temple of Vesta, and the house of the Vestals, see O. Richter, <i>Topographie der Stadt Rom</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 88 <i>sqq.</i>; Ch. Huelsen, <i>Die Ausgrabungen auf dem Forum Romanum</i> 2nd Ed., (Rome, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <i>sqq.</i>, 88 <i>sqq.</i>; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> E. Burton-Brown, <i>Recent Excavations in the Roman Forum</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dio Cassius, liv. 27, who tells us that Augustus annexed the house of the King of the Sacred Rites to the house of the Vestals, on which it abutted.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Many such phenomena are noted by Julius Obsequens in his book of prodigies, appended to W. Weissenborn’s edition of Livy, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <i>sqq.</i> (Berlin, 1881).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Helbig, <i>Die Italiker in der Poebene</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50⁠–⁠55; E. Burton-Brown, <i>Recent Excavations in the Roman Forum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30, 152, 154. For pictures of these hut-urns see G. Boni in <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, May 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> 191, fig. 52; <i>id.</i>, in <i>Nuova Antologia</i>, August 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> 22.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Valerius Maximus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 4. 11; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 310; Acron on Horace, <i>Odes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 31, quoted by G. Boni in <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, May 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179; Cicero, <i>Paradoxa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2; <i>id.</i>, <i>De natura deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 17. 43; Persius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 59 <i>sq.</i>; Juvenal, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 342 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 23. On earthenware vessels used in religious rites see also Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. 108, “<i>In sacris quidem etiam inter has opes hodie non murrinis crystallinisve, sed fictilibus prolibatur simpulis</i>”; Apuleius, <i>De magia</i>, 18, “<i>Eadem paupertas etiam populo Romano imperium a primordio fundavit, proque eo in hodiernum diis immortalibus simpuvio et catino fictili sacrificat.</i>”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Boni in <i>Notizie degli Scavi</i>, May 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179; E. Burton-Brown, <i>Recent Excavations in the Roman Forum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23 <i>sq.</i>, 41.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Helbig, <i>Die Italiker in der Poebene</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. 21 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Henzen, <i>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</i> (Berlin, 1874), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26, 30; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 5039; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 456.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Helbig, <i>Die Italiker in der Poebene</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 87.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Wilmanns, <i>Exempla inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, Nos. 311, 986, 1326, 1331; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, Nos. 456, 3314, 4926, 4933, 4936, 4942, 4943. Modern writers, following Varro (<i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 44, “<i>fictores dicti a fingendis libis</i>”), explain these <i>fictores</i> as bakers of sacred cakes. See Ch. A. Lobeck, <i>Aglaophamus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1084 <i>sq.</i>; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 249. They may be right, but it is to be observed that Varro does not expressly refer to the <i>fictores</i> of the Vestals and Pontiffs, and further, that in Latin <i>fictor</i> commonly means a potter, not a baker, for which the regular word is <i>pistor</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. d’Orbigny, <i>Voyage dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Paris and Strasburg, 1844) <abbr>p.</abbr> 194. Much of d’Orbigny’s valuable information as to this tribe was drawn from the manuscript of Father Lacueva, a Spanish Franciscan monk of wealthy family and saint-like character, who spent eighteen or twenty years among the Yuracares in a vain attempt to convert them. With regard to the crops mentioned in the text, these savages plant banana-trees, manioc, sugar-cane, and vegetables round about their huts, which they erect in clearings of the forest. See d’Orbigny, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 196 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. A. Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou Sud-Africains et leurs tabous,” <i>Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 147.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Columella, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 4. 2 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <i>De natura deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 27. 68.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 211.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Horace, <i>Epodes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 65 <i>sq.</i>; Martial, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 58. 3 <i>sq.</i>; L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 105 <i>sqq.</i>, 155 <i>sqq.</i> See also A. De-Marchi, <i>Il Culto privato di Roma antica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Milan, 1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 67, with plate <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macrobius, <i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 4. 11; G. Wissowa, <i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 145 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “penus,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 250, 251, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 41; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 252 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 66; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. 27. 14; J. Marquardt, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 250 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Ignis,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 106, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller: “<i>Ignis Vestae si quando interstinctus esset, virgines verberibus afficiebantur a pontifice, quibus mos erat tabulam felicis materiae tamdiu terebrare, quousque exceptum ignem cribro aeneo virgo in aedem ferret</i>.” In this passage it is not clear whether <i>quibus</i> refers to the virgins alone or to the virgins and the pontiff together; but the strict grammatical construction is in favour of the latter interpretation. The point is not unimportant, as we shall see presently. From a passage of Plutarch (<i>Numa</i>, 9) it has sometimes been inferred that the Vestal fire was rekindled by sunlight reflected from a burning-glass. But in this passage Plutarch is describing a Greek, not a Roman, mode of making fire, as has been rightly pointed out by Professor M. H. Morgan (“De ignis eliciendi modis apud antiquos,” <i>Harvard Studies in Classical Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 56 <i>sqq.</i>). In this memoir Professor Morgan has collected and discussed the passages of Greek and Latin writers which refer to the kindling of fire.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See E. B. Tylor, <i>Early History of Mankind</i>, 3rd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 238 <i>sqq.</i> More evidence might easily be given. See, for example, J. Dawson, <i>Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15 <i>sq.</i>; C. Lumholtz, <i>Among Cannibals</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 191; A. W. Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 770⁠–⁠773; Maximilian Prinz zu Wied-Newied, <i>Reise nach Brasilien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 18 <i>sq.</i>; E. F. im Thurn, <i>Among the Indians of Guiana</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257⁠–⁠259; K. von den Steinen, <i>Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 223 <i>sqq.</i>; H. Ling Roth, <i>The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 375 <i>sqq.</i>; A. Maass, <i>Bei liebenswürdigen Wilden, ein Beitrag zur Kenntniss der Mentawai-Insulaner</i> (Berlin, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 114, 116; Mgr. Le Roy, “Les Pygmées,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 137; E. Thurston, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i> (Madras, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 464⁠–⁠470; W. A. Reed, <i>Negritos of Zambales</i> (Manila, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 40.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 203, 205 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. part 4).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Walter Fewkes, “The Lesser New-fire Ceremony at Walpi,” <i>American Anthropologist</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 445.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i>Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 621.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For this information I am indebted to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> S. H. Ray.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Jacob, <i>Altarabisches Beduineneben</i> 2nd Ed., (Berlin, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 91. In his <i>Arabic-English Lexicon</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 1257, E. W. Lane gives the following account of the subject: “<i>zand</i>, a piece of stick or wood, for producing fire; the upper one of the two pieces of stick, or wood, with which fire is produced:⁠ ⁠… and <i>zanda</i> is the appellation of the lower one thereof, in which is the notch or hollow, or in which is a hole.⁠ ⁠… One end of the <i>zand</i> is put into the <i>fard</i> (notch) of the <i>zanda</i>, and the <i>zand</i> is then rapidly twirled round in producing fire.⁠ ⁠… The best kind of <i>zand</i> is made of <i>’afār</i> and the best kind of <i>zanda</i> of <i>markh</i>.” It will be observed that the two writers differ as to <i>markh</i> wood, Jacob saying that it is used to make the upright (male) stick, and Lane that it is used to make the horizontal (female) stick. My learned friend Professor A. A. Bevan, who directed my attention to both passages and transliterated for me the Arabic words in Lane, has kindly consulted the original authorities on this point and informs me that Lane is right.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Concradt, “Die Ngumbu in Südkamerun,” <i>Globus</i>, lxxxi, (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 354.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Hollis, <i>The Masai</i> (Oxford, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 342.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. C. Hollis, <i>The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>p.</abbr> 85.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Roscoe, dated Mengo, Uganda, 3rd August 1904.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Macdonald, <i>Light in Africa</i> 2nd Ed., (London, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 216 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 51 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i> (Gütersloh, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49 <i>sqq.</i>, 53 <i>sqq.</i> Compare Josaphat Hahn, “Die Ovaherero,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 227 <i>sqq.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i> (Oldenburg and Leipsic, <span class="fss">N.D.</span>), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142 <i>sq.</i>; E. Dannert, <i>Zum Rechte der Herero</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1 <i>sqq.</i> The people call themselves <i>Ovaherero</i> (plural); the singular form is <i>Omuherero</i>. The name Damaras was given them by the English and Dutch. Under the influence of the missionaries most of the heathen customs described in the text seem now to have disappeared. See P. H. Brincker, “Character, Sitten, und Gebräuche, speciell der Bantu Deutsch-Südwest-afrikas,” <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 72.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 230; J. Chapman, <i>Travels in the Interior of South Africa</i> (London, 1868), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 325; J. Hahn, “Die Ovaherero,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 244⁠–⁠247, 250; C. J. Büttner, <i>Das Hinterland von Walfischbai und Angra Pequena</i> (Heidelberg, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <i>sq.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158⁠–⁠161; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32 <i>sqq.</i>, 113.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Francis Galton, <i>Narrative of an Explorer in Tropical South Africa</i> 3rd Ed., (London, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 116; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869), <abbr>p.</abbr> 247; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 155; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 111 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 159.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 155⁠–⁠157; compare J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 499; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 78; E. Dannert, <i>Zum Rechte der Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4 <i>sq.</i> At first sight <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Schinz’s account appears to differ slightly from that given by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, who says: “In the werfts of the Ovaherero, the houses of the chief are on the eastern side. Next to these, towards the west, follow, one after another, the holy house (<i>otyizero</i>), the place of the holy fire (<i>okuruo</i>), and the kraal [<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr></i> the calves’ pen] (<i>otyunda</i>); thus the <i>otyizero</i> is on the east, and the <i>otyunda</i> on the west side of the <i>okuruo</i>” (“Some Customs of the Ovaherero,” <i>South African Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 62). But it seems clear that by the chief’s house <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viehe means what <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Schinz calls the house of the great wife; and that what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viehe calls the holy house is the open space between the sacred hearth and the house of the great wife or chief. That space is described as the holy ground by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Schinz, who uses that phrase (“<i>der geweihte Boden</i>”) as the equivalent of the native <i>otyizero</i>. Thus the two writers are in substantial agreement with each other. On the other hand <abbr>Dr.</abbr> C. H. Hahn gives the name of <i>otyizero</i> or sacred house to “the chief house of the chief, in front of which is the place of the holy fire.” He adds that “the chief has several houses, according to the number of wives, each wife having her own hut” (<i>South African Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 62, note 1.) The name <i>otyizero</i> seems to be derived from <i>zera</i>, “sacred,” “taboo.” See G. Viehe, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 39, 41, 43; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> E. Dannert, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63, 65, 105, and the editor’s note, <i>ib.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 155.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 223; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 500; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 165.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Brincker, <i>Wörterbuch und kurzgefasste Grammatik des Otjiherero</i> (Leipsic, 1886), <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “<i>okuruo</i>”; <i>id.</i> “Pyrolatrie in Südafrika,” <i>Globus</i>, lxvii. (January 1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 97; Meyer, quoted by J. Kohler, “Das Recht der Herero,” <i>Zeitschrift für vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 315.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-703" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 499 <i>sq.</i>; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> H. Beiderbecke, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84; C. G. Büttner, “Ueber Handwerke und technische Fertigkeiten der Eingeborenen in Damaraland,” <i>Ausland</i>, 7th July 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 522; P. H. Brincker, in <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 75; <i>id.</i>, <i>Wörterbuch des Otjiherero</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “<i>okuruo</i>”; <i>id.</i>, “Pyrolatrie in Südafrika,” <i>Globus</i>, lxvii. (January 1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 97; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 183; Meyer, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-704" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 223; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 500; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> E. Dannert, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 66; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> H. Beiderbecke, <i>ibid.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 83, note 4; C. G. Büttner, <i>l.c.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 165; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 78 <i>sq.</i>; E. Dannert, <i>Zum Rechte der Herero</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5. According to Meyer (<i>l.c.</i>) and E. Dannert (<i>Zum Rechte der Herero</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5), if the chief’s eldest daughter marries, the duty of tending the fire passes to his eldest wife. This statement is at variance with all the other testimony on the subject, and for reasons which will appear presently I regard it as improbable. At least it can hardly represent the original custom.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-705" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> H. Beiderbecke, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-706" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> E. Dannert, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 66; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 168.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-707" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Francis Galton, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-708" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 223.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-709" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>l.c.</i>; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 500; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 167.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-710" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 717 <i>sqq.</i>, 747.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-711" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 224; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 43; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> E. Dannert, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 67; C. G. Büttner, <i>l.c.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 166, 167, 186; Meyer, quoted by J. Kohler, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 315; P. H. Brincker, in <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <i>sq.</i>; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 80; E. Dannert, <i>Zum Rechte der Herero</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-712" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <i>sq.</i>; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <i>sq.</i>; C. G. Büttner, <i>l.c.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165, 180. The Herero have a curious twofold system of paternal clans (<i>otuzo</i>, plural; <i>oruzo</i>, singular) and maternal clans (<i>omaanda</i>, plural; <i>eanda</i>, singular). Every person inherits an <i>oruzo</i> from his father and an <i>eanda</i> from his mother. See my <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 357 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-713" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 223 <i>sq.</i>; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 500; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 39, 61; C. G. Büttner, <i>l.c.</i>; H. Brincker, <i>Wörterbuch des Otji-herero</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vv</span>.</i> <i>ondume</i> and <i>otjija</i>; <i>id.</i> “Character, Sitten, und Gebräuche, speciell der Bantu Deutsch-Südwest-afrikas,” <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 75; <i>id.</i> “Pyrolatrie in Südafrika,” <i>Globus</i>, lxvii. (January, 1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 96; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <i>sq.</i>; J. Kohler, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 305, 315; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 79 <i>sq.</i> According to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Schinz, the meaning of the names applied to the fire-sticks has been much disputed; he himself adopts the view given in the text, and supports it by weighty reason which, taken along with analogous designations in many other parts of the world, may be regarded as conclusive. He tells us that <i>otyiza</i> means <i>pudendum muliebre</i>, and this is actually the name of the holed stick according to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viehe (<i>ll.cc.</i>), though <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Schinz gives <i>otyia</i> as the name. I have followed <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brincker in accepting <i>otyiya</i> (<i>otjija</i>) as the correct form of the word. Further, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Schinz derives <i>ondume</i>, the name of the pointed stick, from a verb <i>ruma</i>, meaning “to have intercourse with a woman.” Moreover, he reports that the Ai San Bushmen, near Noihas, in the Kalahari desert, call the vertical fire-stick <i>tau doro</i> and the horizontal fire-stick <i>gai doro</i>, where <i>tau</i> is the masculine prefix and <i>gai</i> the feminine. Finally, a Herero explained to him the significance of the names by referring in an unmistakable manner to the corresponding relations in the animal kingdom. That the two sticks are regarded as male and female is positively affirmed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Viehe, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Meyer (quoted by J. Kohler), and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brincker.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-714" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_213">213</a> <i>sq.</i> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> G. Viehe says that the <i>omuwapu</i> tree “acts a very important part in almost all the religious ceremonies” of the Herero (<i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 45). Probably it is only used where the <i>omumborombonga</i> cannot be had.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-715" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Hahn, “Das Land der Herero,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 200, 213, 214 <i>sq.</i>; C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 218, 221; <i>id.</i>, <i>The Okavango River</i> (London, 1861), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21 <i>sq.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 182.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-716" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 221; Francis Galton, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 115; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1868) <abbr>p.</abbr> 215, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 498, note; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> H. Beiderbecke, in <i>(South African) Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92 <i>sq.</i>; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 182 <i>sq.</i>; Meyer, quoted by J. Kohler, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 297; P. H. Brincker, in <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i> (1900), Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 73; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <i>sq.</i>, 77; E. Dannert, <i>Zum Rechte der Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-717" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the evidence for this migration see J. Chapman, <i>Travels in the Interior of South Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 325⁠–⁠327; J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 227 <i>sqq.</i> As to the physical features and climate of Hereroland, see J. Hahn, “Das Land der Ovaherero,” <i>Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <i>sqq.</i>; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9 <i>sqq.</i>, 19 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-718" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 13. 3, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 14. 2. On the substitution of the poplar for the oak, see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook in <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-719" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, “Some Customs of the Ovaherero,” (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64⁠–⁠66; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> H. Beiderbecke, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 91; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <i>sq.</i>; P. H. Brincker, in <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89 <i>sq.</i>; J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 74, 75, 77. Apparently it is only a powerful or eminent man who becomes an <i>omukuru</i> after his death. Or rather, perhaps, though all dead men become <i>ovakuru</i>, only the strong and brave are feared and worshipped.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-720" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 183.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-721" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> E. Dannert, “Customs of the Ovaherero at the Birth of a Child,” (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 66 <i>sq.</i> Compare <abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 41; H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 168.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-722" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-723" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 51.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-724" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 166. Compare J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 77.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-725" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Hahn, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 500, note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-726" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. J. Andersson, <i>Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <i>sq.</i> The ceremony is described more fully by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, “Some Customs of the Ovaherero,” (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <i>sq.</i>, from whose account some of the details in the text are borrowed.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-727" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The distinction is made also by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> J. Irle. According to him, while the fire-sticks are called <i>ozondume</i> (plural of <i>ondume</i>), the sticks which represent the ancestors are called <i>ozohongue</i> and are made from the <i>omuvapu</i> bush. In every chief’s house there is a bundle of about twenty of these ancestral sticks. When a chief dies, the sticks are wrapped in a portion of the sacred bull (<i>omusisi</i>) which is slaughtered on this occasion, and a new stick is added to the bundle. At the same time <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Irle tells us that the fire-sticks (<i>ozondume</i>) also represent the ancestors and are made like them from the <i>omuvapu</i> bush. See J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77, 79.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-728" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bensen, quoted by J. Kohler, “Das Recht der Herero,” <i>Zeitschrift für vergleichende Rechtswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 305.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-729" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, or his editor, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 39. The <i>otyiza</i> (<i>otyiya</i>) is the female fire-stick. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_218">218</a> note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-730" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> G. Viehe, in (<i>South African</i>) <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 61.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-731" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Ibid.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 43, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 50.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-732" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Irle, <i>Die Herero</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 79.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-733" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I have assumed that the ancestral sticks, whatever their origin, represent only men. This is plainly implied by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Brincker, who tells us that “each of these sticks represents the male member of generation and in the Bantu sense a personality, which stands for the presence of the deceased chief on all festive occasions and especially at religious ceremonies” (“Character, Sitten, und Gebräuche, speciell der Bantu Deutsch-Südwestafrikas,” <i>Mittheilungen des Seminars für Orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 74). In savage society women are of too little account for their ghosts to be commonly worshipped. Speaking of the Bantu peoples, a writer who knows them well observes: “This lack of respect for old women is a part of the natives’ religious system, and is connected with their conception of a future life, in which women play a subordinate part, their spirits not being able to cause much trouble, and therefore not being of much account” (Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-734" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Jochelson, “The Koryak,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32⁠–⁠36 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>., Leyden and New York, 1908).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-735" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Bogaras, “The Chukchee Religion,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 349⁠–⁠353 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., Leyden and New York, 1904).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-736" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. 11. 6 <i>sq.</i>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 67. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-737" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 265 <i>sqq.</i>; Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 262, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-738" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11 <i>sq.</i> On the diffusion of the round hut in Africa Sir H. H. Johnston says: “The original form of house throughout all British Central Africa was what the majority of the houses still are⁠—circular and somewhat like a beehive in shape, with round walls of wattle and daub and thatched roof. This style of house is characteristic of (<i>a</i>) all Africa south of the Zambezi; (<i>b</i>) all British Central Africa; as much of the Portuguese provinces of Zambezia and Moçambique as are not under direct Portuguese or Muhammedan influence which may have introduced the rectangular dwelling; (<i>c</i>) all East Africa up to and including the Egyptian Sudan, where Arab influence has not introduced the oblong rectangular building; (<i>d</i>) the Central Nigerian Sudan, much of Senegambia, and perhaps the West Coast of Africa as far east and south as the Gold Coast, subject, of course, to the same limitations as to foreign influence” (<i>British Central Africa</i>, London, 1897, P. 453).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-739" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 250, 341 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-740" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Marquardt, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 340 <i>sq.</i>; <i>Journal of Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 155 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-741" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3 <i>sq.</i>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 76 <i>sq.</i>; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-742" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 10; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 67. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 89. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-743" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The suggestion is due to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> M. A. Bayfield (<i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 1901, <abbr>p.</abbr> 448). He compares the similar execution of the princess Antigone (Sophocles, <i>Antigone</i>, 773 <i>sqq.</i>). However, we must remember that a custom of burying people alive has been practised as a punishment or a sacrifice by Romans, Persians, and Germans, even when the victims were not of royal blood. See Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. 57. 6; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. 12; Plutarch, <i>Marcellus</i>, 3; <i>id.</i>, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 83; Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 114; J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</i>, 3rd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 694 <i>sq.</i> As to the objection to spill royal blood, see <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 354 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-744" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_215">215</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-745" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 629⁠–⁠672. Compare Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 15; Joannes Lydus, <i>De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 49.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-746" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 731⁠–⁠782. See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_326">326</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-747" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. 39; “<i>Quamquam religione tutatur et fascinus, imperatorum quoque, non solum infantium custos, qui deus inter sacra Romana Vestalibus colitur</i>.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-748" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 498; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 828; G. Henzen, <i>Acta fratrum Arvalium</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 124, 147; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, Nos. 5047, 5048. Ennius represented Vesta as the mother of Saturn and Titan. See Lactantius, <i>Divin. inst.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 14.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-749" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 10.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-750" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_195">195</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-751" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Grihya Sûtras</i>, translated by H. Oldenberg, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37, 168, 279, 283, 382, 384, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46, 191, 260; M. Winternitz, “Das altindische Hochzeitsrituell,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 56⁠–⁠62 (<i>Denkschriften der kaiserl. Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien</i>, xl., Vienna, 1892); H. Zimmer, <i>Altindisches Leben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 312; G. A. Grierson, <i>Bihār Peasant Life</i> (Calcutta, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 368; F. S. Krauss, <i>Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 386, 436, cp. 430; J. Lasicius, “De diis Samagitarum caeterorumque Sarmatarum,” in <i>Magazin herausgegeben von der Lettisch-Literarischen Gesellschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 99; J. Maeletius (Maletius), “De sacrificiis et idolatria veterum Borussorum Livonum aliarumque vicinarum gentium,” in <i>Mitteilungen der Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 191, 204 (this work is also reprinted under the name of J. Menecius in <i>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 389⁠–⁠392); F. Woeste, in <i>Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1855) <abbr>p.</abbr> 91; A. Kuhn und W. Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 433, 522; A. Kuhn, <i>Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen aus Westfalen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 38; J. H. Schmitz, <i>Sitten und Sagen, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, des Eifler Volkes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 67; Montanus, <i>Die deutsche Volksfeste, Volksbräuche und deutscher Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Hochzeitsbuch</i> (Leipsic, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 222; L. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Schroeder, <i>Die Hochzeitsbräuche der Esten</i> (Berlin, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 127 <i>sqq.</i>; E. Samter, <i>Familienfeste der Griechen und Römer</i> (Berlin, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59⁠–⁠62; O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 356 <i>sq.</i> This evidence proves that the custom has been practised by the Indian, Slavonian, Lithuanian, and Teutonic branches of the Aryan race, from which we may fairly infer that it was observed by the ancestors of the whole family before their dispersion.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-752" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Grihya-Sûtras</i>, translated by H. Oldenberg, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 283 (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-753" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> Vl. Titelbach, “Das heilige Feuer bei den Balkanslaven,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-754" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</i> (Vienna, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 430.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-755" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 531.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-756" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This saying was communicated to me by Miss Mabel Peacock in a letter dated Kirton-in-Lindsey, Lincolnshire, 30th October 1905.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-757" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Max Buch, <i>Die Wotjäken</i> (Stuttgart, 1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 52, 59; L. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Schroeder, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129, 132.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-758" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_221">221</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-759" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As it is believed that fire may impregnate human beings, so conversely some people seem to imagine that it may be impregnated by them. Thus <abbr>Mr.</abbr> T. R. Glover, Fellow of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s College, Cambridge, writes to me (18th June 1906): “A curious and not very quotable instance of (I suppose) Sacred Marriage was brought to my notice by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown of the Canadian Baptist Mission to the Telugus. He said that in Hindoo temples (in South India chiefly?) sometimes a scaffolding is erected over a fire. A man and a woman are got to copulate on it and allow the human seed to fall into the fire.” But perhaps this ceremony is only another way of conveying the fertilising virtue of the fire to the woman, in other words, of getting her with child.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-760" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_215">215</a>, <a href="#Page_221">221</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-761" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Suidas, Harpocration, and <i>Etymologicum Magnum</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Ἀμφιδρόμια; Hesychius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> δρομάφιον ἧμαρ; Schol. on Plato, <i>Theaetetus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 160 <span class="fss">E</span>. On this custom see S. Reinach, <i>Cultes, mythes, et religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 137⁠–⁠145. He suggests that the running of the naked men who carried the babies was intended, by means of sympathetic magic, to impart to the little ones in after-life the power of running fast. But this theory does not explain why the race took place round the hearth.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-762" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The custom has been practised with this intention in Scotland, China, New Britain, the Tenimber and Timorlaut Islands, and by the Ovambo of South Africa. See Pennant’s “Second Tour in Scotland,” Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 383; Miss C. F. Gordon Cumming, <i>In the Hebrides</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 101; <i>China Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1880⁠–⁠1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 303; R. Parkinson, <i>Im Bismarck-Archipel</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <i>sq.</i>; J. G. F. Riedel, <i>De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 303; H. Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 307. A similar custom was observed, probably for the same reason, in ancient Mexico and in Madagascar. See Clavigero, <i>History of Mexico</i>, translated by Cullen, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 31; W. Ellis, <i>History of Madagascar</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 152. Compare my note, “The Youth of Achilles,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 293 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-763" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare E. Samter, <i>Familienfeste der Griechen und Römer</i> (Berlin, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59⁠–⁠62.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-764" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>The Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 120 <i>sq.</i> Ralston held that the Russian house-spirit Domovoy, who is supposed to live behind the stove, is the modern representative of an ancestral spirit. Compare <i>ibid.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 84, 86, 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-765" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Evidence of this view will be adduced later on. See <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 456.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-766" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_185">185</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-767" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Schroeder, <i>Die Hochzeitsbräuche der Esten</i> (Berlin, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-768" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_197">197</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-769" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Mommsen, <i>History of Rome</i>, New Edition (London, 1894), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 215 <i>sq.</i>; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 326; W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 147. For another derivation of their name see below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_247">247</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-770" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_207">207</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-771" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Vaughan Stevens, “Mitteilungen aus dem Frauenleben der Ôrang Belendas, der Ôrang Djâkun und der Ôrang Lâut,” bearbeitet von <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Max Bartels, <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168 <i>sq.</i> The writer adds that any person, boy, man, or woman (provided she was not menstruous) might light the fire, if it were more convenient that he or she should do so. Thus the co-operation of a married man and an unmarried girl, though apparently deemed the best, was not the only permissible way of igniting the wood. The good faith or at all events the accuracy of the late German traveller H. Vaughan Stevens is not, I understand, above suspicion; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nelson Annandale, joint author of <i>Fasciculi Malayenses</i>, writes to me of him that “he certainly had a knowledge and experience of the wild tribes of the Malay region which few or none have excelled, for he lived literally as one of themselves.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-772" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> Vl. Titelbach, “Das heilige Feuer bei den Balkanslaven,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 2⁠–⁠4. The ceremony witnessed by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> Titelbach will be described later on in this work. Kinglake rode through the great Servian forest on his way from Belgrade to Constantinople, and from his description (<i>Eothen</i>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>.) we gather that it is chiefly composed of oak. He says: “Endless and endless now on either side the tall oaks closed in their ranks, and stood gloomily lowering over us.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-773" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Gilhodes, “La Culture matérielle des Katchins (Birmanie),” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 629.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-774" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Martin’s “Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 611. The first edition of Martin’s work was published in 1703, and the second in 1716.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-775" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 504.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-776" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Casalis, <i>The Basutos</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 267 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-777" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 68; Valerius Maximus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-778" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Lecœur, <i>Esquisses du Bocage Normand</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Condé-sur-Noireau, 1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 27; B. Souché, <i>Croyances, présages et traditions diverses</i> (Niort, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-779" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 13. In Darfur a curious power over fire is ascribed to women who have been faithful to their husbands. “It is a belief among the Forians, that if the city takes fire, the only means of arresting the progress of the flames is to bring near them a woman, no longer young, who has never been guilty of intrigue. If she be pure, by merely waving a mantle, she puts a stop to the destruction. Success has sometimes rewarded a virtuous woman” (<i>Travels of an Arab Merchant</i> [Mohammed Ibn-Omar El-Tounsy] <i>in Soudan</i>, abridged from the French by Bayle <abbr>St.</abbr> John (London, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 112). Compare R. W. Felkin, “Notes on the For Tribe of Central Africa,” <i>Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884⁠–⁠1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 230.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-780" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. 10. The Celtic Minerva, according to Caesar (<i>De bello Gallico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 17), was a goddess of the mechanical arts.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-781" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Rhys, <i>Celtic Heathendom</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73⁠–⁠77; P. W. Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 260 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-782" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Giraldus Cambrensis, <i>The Topography of Ireland</i>, chaps. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>.-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>., translated by Thomas Wright; P. W. Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 334 <i>sq.</i> It is said that in the island of Sena (the modern <i>Sein</i>), off the coast of Brittany, there was an oracle of a Gallic deity whose worship was cared for by nine virgin priestesses. They could raise storms by their incantations, and turn themselves into any animals they pleased (<i>Mela</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 48); but it is not said that they maintained a perpetual holy fire, though Ch. Elton affirms that they did (<i>Origins of English History</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 27). M. Salomon Reinach dismisses these virgins as a fable based on Homer’s description of the isle of Circe (<i>Odyssey</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 135 <i>sqq.</i>), and he denies that the Gauls employed virgin priestesses. See his article, “Les Vierges de Sena,” <i>Revue Celtique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠8; <i>id.</i>, <i>Cultes, mythes, et religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 195 <i>sqq.</i> To me the nuns of <abbr>St.</abbr> Brigit seem to be most probably the successors of a Celtic order of Vestals. That there were female Druids is certain, but it does not appear whether they were virgins. See Lampridius, <i>Alexander Severus</i>, 60; Vopiscus, <i>Aurelianus</i>, 44; <i>id.</i>, <i>Numerianus</i>, 14 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-783" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> Vl. Titelbach, “Das heilige Feuer bei den Balkanslaven,” <i>Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-784" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Laws of Manu</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 53, translated by G. Bühler (<i>Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 137).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-785" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Martin Haug, <i>Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of the Parsees</i> 3rd Ed., (London, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 243, note 1. Strabo describes the mouth-veil worn by the Magian priests in Cappadocia (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 3. 15, <abbr>p.</abbr> 733). At Arkon, in the island of Rügen, there was a shrine so holy that none but the priest might enter it, and even he might not breathe in it. As often as he needed to draw in or give out breath, he used to run out of the door lest he should taint the divine presence with his breath. See Saxo Grammaticus, <i>Historia Danica</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 824, <abbr>ed.</abbr> P. E. Müller (<abbr>p.</abbr> 393 of Elton’s English translation).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-786" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. W. Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 335 <i>sq.</i>; Standish H. O’Grady, <i>Sylva Gadelica</i>, translation (London, 1892), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15, 16, 41.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-787" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_94">94</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-788" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_229">229</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-789" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Douglas Hyde, <i>A Literary History of Ireland</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 158. The tradition of the oak of Kildare survives in the lines,</p>
					<div class="c007 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">“<i>That oak of Saint Bride, which nor Devil nor Dane</i></div>
								<div class="line"><i>Nor Saxon nor Dutchman could rend from her fane</i>,”</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="c008">which are quoted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> D. Fitzgerald in <i>Revue Celtique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1879⁠–⁠1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 193.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-790" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Douglas Hyde, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 169⁠–⁠171. At Kells, also, <abbr>St.</abbr> Columba dwelt under a great oak-tree. The writer of his Irish life, quoted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hyde, says that the oak-tree “remained till these latter times, when it fell through the crash of a mighty wind. And a certain man took somewhat of its bark to tan his shoes with. Now, when he did on the shoes, he was smitten with leprosy from his sole to his crown.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-791" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Garcilasso de la Vega, <i>Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</i>, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. chaps. 1⁠–⁠3, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. chaps. 20⁠–⁠22 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 292⁠–⁠299, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 155⁠–⁠164, Markham’s translation); P. de Cieza de Leon, <i>Travels</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 134 (Markham’s translation); <i>id.</i>, <i>Second Part of the Chronicle of Peru</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85 <i>sq.</i> (Markham’s translation); Acosta, <i>Natural and Moral History of the Indies</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>chap.</abbr> 15 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 331⁠–⁠333, Hakluyt Society). Professor E. B. Tylor discredits Garcilasso’s description of these Peruvian priestesses on the ground that it resembles Plutarch’s account of the Roman Vestals (<i>Numa</i>, 9 <i>sq.</i>) too closely to be independent; he thinks that “the apparent traces of absorption from Plutarch invalidate whatever rests on Garcilasso de la Vega’s unsupported testimony.” See his <i>Researches into the Early History of Mankind</i>, 3rd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249⁠–⁠253. In particular, he stumbles at the statement that an unfaithful Peruvian priestess was buried alive. But that statement was made by Cieza de Leon, who travelled in Peru when Garcilasso was a child, and whose book, or rather the first part of it, containing the statement, was published more than fifty years before that of Garcilasso. Moreover, when we understand that the punishment in question was based on a superstition which occurs independently in many parts of the world, the apparent improbability of the coincidence vanishes. As to the mode of kindling the sacred fire, Professor Tylor understands Plutarch to say that the sacred fire at Rome was kindled, as in Peru, by a burning-glass. To me it seems that Plutarch is here speaking of a Greek, not a Roman usage, and this is made still clearer when his text is read correctly. For the words ὑπὸ Μήδων, περὶ δὲ τὰ Μιθριδιατικά should be altered to ὑπὸ Μαίδων περὶ τὰ Μιθριδιατικά. See H. Pomtow in <i>Rheinisches Museum</i>, N. F. li. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 365, and my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 19. 4 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 331). Thus Plutarch gives two instances when a sacred fire was extinguished and had to be relit with a burning-glass; but both instances are Greek, neither is Roman. The Greek mode of lighting a sacred fire by means of a crystal is described also in the Orphic poem on precious stones, verses 177 <i>sqq.</i> (<i>Orphica</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> E. Abel, <abbr>p.</abbr> 115). Nor were the Greeks and Peruvians peculiar in this respect. The Siamese and Chinese have also been in the habit of kindling a sacred fire by means of a metal mirror or burning-glass. See Pallegoix, <i>Description du royaume Thai ou Siam</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 55; A. Bastian, <i>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 516; J. H. Plath, “Die Religion und der Cultus der alten Chinesen,” <i>Abhandlungen der k. bayer. Akademie der Wissen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. Cl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1863) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 876 <i>sq.</i> Again, the full description of the golden garden of the Peruvian Vestals, which may sound to us fabulous, is given by Cieza de Leon in a work (the <i>Second Part of the Chronicle of Peru</i>) which it is unlikely that Garcilasso ever saw, since it was not printed till 1873, centuries after his death. Yet Garcilasso’s brief description of the garden agrees closely with that of Cieza de Leon, differing from it just as that of an independent witness naturally would⁠—namely, in the selection of some other details in addition to those which the two have in common. He says that the virgins “had a garden of trees, plants, herbs, birds and beasts, made of gold and silver, like that in the temple” (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 298, Markham’s translation). Thus the two accounts are probably independent and therefore trustworthy, for a fiction of this kind could hardly have occurred to two romancers separately. A strong confirmation of Garcilasso’s fidelity is furnished by the close resemblance which the fire customs, both of Rome and Peru, present to the well-authenticated fire customs of the Herero at the present day. There seems to be every reason to think that all three sets of customs originated independently in the simple needs and superstitious fancies of the savage. On the whole, I see no reason to question the good faith and accuracy of Garcilasso.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-792" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. de Sahagun, <i>Histoire des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 196 <i>sq.</i>, 386; Acosta, <i>Natural and Moral History of the Indies</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. ch. 15 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 333 <i>sq.</i>, Hakluyt Society); A. de Herrera, <i>General History of the vast Continent and Islands of America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 209 <i>sq.</i>, Stevens’s translation (London, 1725, 1726); Clavigero, <i>History of Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 264, 274 <i>sq.</i>; Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 289, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 661; H. H. Bancroft, <i>Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 204 <i>sqq.</i>, 245, 583, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 435 <i>sq.</i> However, Sahagun (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 186, 194), Acosta (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 336) and Herrera seem to imply that the duty of maintaining the sacred fire was discharged by men only.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-793" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 6; H. H. Bancroft, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 473. Fire-worship seems to have lingered among the Indians of Yucatan down to about the middle of the nineteenth century, and it may still survive among them. See D. G. Brinton, “The Folk-lore of Yucatan,” <i>Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1883) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 247 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-794" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Roscoe, dated Kampala, Uganda, 9th April 1909.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-795" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 15. 22; Ateius Capito, cited by Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 50. On the other hand, Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 29, says that the Flamen might marry another wife after the death of the first. But the statement of Aulus Gellius and Ateius Capito is confirmed by other evidence. See J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 329, note 8. As to the rule see my note, “The Widowed Flamen,” <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 407 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-796" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 15. 7; Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 106, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-797" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 52. 13 <i>sq.</i> In later times the rule was so far relaxed that he was allowed to be absent from Rome for two nights or even longer, provided he got leave from the chief pontiff on the score of ill-health. See Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 15. 14; Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 71.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-798" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 58; Dio Cassius, liv. 36. As to the honours attached to the office, see Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. 8. 8; Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 113.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-799" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-800" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 241 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-800" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-801" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Kretschmer, <i>Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</i> (Göttingen, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 127 <i>sqq.</i>; O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 637 <i>sq.</i> For a different derivation of the name Flamen see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_235">235</a>. Being no philologer, I do not pretend to decide between the rival etymologies. My friend <abbr>Prof.</abbr> J. H. Moulton prefers the equation <i>Flamen</i> = <i>Brahman</i>, which he tells me is philologically correct, because if <i>Flamen</i> came from <i>flare</i> we should expect a form like <i>flator</i> rather than <i>flamen</i>. The form <i>flator</i> was used in Latin, though not in this sense.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-801" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-802" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>The Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 30⁠–⁠32. Compare Monier Williams, <i>Religious Thought and Life in India</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 364, 365, 392.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-802" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-803" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 15.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-803" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-804" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Homer, <i>Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 233⁠–⁠235; Sophocles, <i>Trachiniae</i>, 1166 <i>sq.</i>; Callimachus, <i>Hymn to Delos</i>, 284⁠–⁠286.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-804" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-805" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Hartknoch, <i>Selectae dissertationes historicae de variis rebus Prussicis</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 163 (bound up with his edition of Düsburg’s <i>Chronicon Prussiae</i>, Frankfort and Leipsic, 1679); Simon Grunau, <i>Preussischer Chronik</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> M. Perlbach, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipsic, 1876) <abbr>p.</abbr> 95.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-805" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-806" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 31⁠–⁠33.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-806" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-807" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 194 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-807" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-808" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. C. Nesfield, in <i>Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 12, § 77.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-808" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-809" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Rigveda</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 29, translated by R. T. H. Griffith (Benares, 1889⁠–⁠1892), <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 25⁠–⁠27; <i>Satapatha Brâhmana</i>, translated by J. Eggeling, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 389, note 3, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 90 <i>sq.</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68⁠–⁠74; <i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, translated by M. Bloomfield, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91, 97 <i>sq.</i>, 334, 460; W. Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 115 <i>sq.</i>; A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 40, 64⁠–⁠78, 183⁠–⁠185; H. Zimmer, <i>Altindisches Leben</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58, 59. The <i>sami</i> wood is sometimes identified with the <i>Acacia Suma</i> (<i>Mimosa Suma</i>); but the modern Bengalee name of <i>Prosopis spicigera</i> is <i>shami</i> or <i>somi</i>, which seems to be conclusive evidence of the identity of <i>Prosopis spicigera</i> with <i>sami</i>. The <i>Prosopis spicigera</i> is a deciduous thorny tree of moderate size, which grows in the arid zones of the Punjaub, Rajputana, Gujarat, Bundelcund, and the Deccan. The heart of the wood is of a purplish brown colour and extremely hard. It is especially valued for fuel, as it gives out much heat. See G. Watt, <i>Dictionary of the Economic Products of India</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Prosopis spicigera.” For a reference to this work I am indebted to the kindness of the late Professor H. Marshall Ward.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-809" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-810" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 40, 66, 175.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-810" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-811" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Hymns of the Atharva-Veda</i>, translated by M. Bloomfield, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <i>sq.</i>, 460; W. Caland, <i>Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 115 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-811" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-812" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_195">195</a> <i>sqq.</i>, <a href="#Page_230">230</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-812" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-813" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Rigveda</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 95, translated by R. T. H. Griffith, <i>Satapatha Brâhmana</i>, translated by J. Eggeling, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68⁠–⁠74. Compare H. Oldenberg, <i>Die Literatur des alten Indien</i> (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 53⁠–⁠55. On the story see A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 71 <i>sqq.</i>; F. Max Müller <i>Selected Essays on Language, Religion, and Mythology</i> (London, 1881), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 408 <i>sqq.</i>; Andrew Lang, <i>Custom and Myth</i> (London, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <i>sqq.</i>; K. F. Pischel and Geldner, <i>Vedische Studien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Stuttgart, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 243⁠–⁠295. It belongs to the group of tales which describe the marriage of a human with an animal mate, of a mortal with a fairy, and often, though not always, their unhappy parting. The story seems to have its roots in totemism. See my <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 566 <i>sqq.</i> It will be illustrated more at length in a later part of <i>The Golden Bough</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-813" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-814" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Homer, <i>Hymn to Mercury</i>, 108⁠–⁠111 (where a line has been lost; see the note of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Allen and Sikes); Theophrastus, <i>Histor. plant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 9. 6; <i>id.</i>, <i>De igne</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 64; Hesychius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> στορεύς; Schol. on Apollonius Rhodius, <i>Argon.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1184; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 208; Seneca, <i>Nat. Quaest.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 22; A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35⁠–⁠41; H. Blumner, <i>Technologie und Terminologie der Gewerbe und Künste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 354⁠–⁠356. Theophrastus gives the name of <i>athragene</i> to the plant which, next to or equally with ivy, makes the best board; he compares it to a vine. Pliny (<i>l.c.</i>) seems to have identified it with a species of wild vine. According to Sprengel, the <i>athragene</i> is the <i>Clematis cirrhosa</i> of Linnaeus, the French <i>clématite à vrilles</i>. See Dioscorides, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Sprengel, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 641. As to the kinds of wood employed by the Romans in kindling fire we have no certain evidence, as Pliny and Seneca may have merely copied from Theophrastus.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-814" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-815" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 31. 6, with my note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-815" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-816" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Man, <i>On the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands</i> (London, <span class="fss">N.D.</span>), <abbr>p.</abbr> 82. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Man’s evidence is confirmed by a German traveller, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jagor, who says of the Andaman Islanders: “The fire must never go out. Here also I am again assured that the Andamanese have no means of making fire.” See <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</i>, 1877, <abbr>p.</abbr> (54) (bound with <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>.). I regret that on this subject I did not question <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. R. Brown, Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge, who resided for about two years among the Andaman Islanders, studying their customs and beliefs. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brown is now (December 1910) in West Australia.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-816" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-817" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>N. von Miklucho-Maclay, “Ethnologische Bemerkungen über die Papuas der Maclay-Küste in Neu-Guinea,” <i>Natuurkundig Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82, 83. Compare C. Hager, <i>Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und der Bismarck-Archipel</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69; M. Krieger, <i>Neu-Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 153. The natives of the Maclay Coast are said to have traditions of a time when they were ignorant even of the use of fire; they ate fruits raw, which set up a disease of the gums, filling their mouths with blood; they had a special name for the disease. See N. von Miklucho-Maclay, in <i>Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</i>, 1882, <abbr>p.</abbr> (577) (bound with <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>.). The reports of people living in ignorance of the use of fire have hitherto proved, on closer examination, to be fables. See E. B. Tylor, <i>Researches into the Early History of Mankind</i>, 3rd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229 <i>sqq.</i> The latest repetition of the story that I know of is by an American naturalist, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Titian R. Peale, who confirms the exploded statement that down to 1841 the natives of Bowditch Island had not seen fire. See <i>The American Naturalist</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1884) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229⁠–⁠232.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-817" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-818" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>B. Hagen, <i>Unter den Papuas</i> (Wiesbaden, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 203 <i>sq.</i> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hagen’s account applies chiefly to the natives of Astrolabe Bay. He tells us that for the most part they now use Swedish matches.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-818" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-819" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Casati, <i>Ten Years in Equatoria</i> (London and New York, 1891), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 157. Another writer says that these dwarfs “keep fire alight perpetually, starting it in some large tree, which goes on smouldering for months at a time” (Captain Guy Burrows, <i>The Land of the Pigmies</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 199).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-819" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-820" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Stuhlmann, <i>Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 451 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-820" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-821" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry H. Johnston, <i>British Central Africa</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 439; <i>id.</i>, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 540. If we may trust Diodorus Siculus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 13. 3), this was the origin of fire alleged by the Egyptian priests. Among the Winamwanga and Wiwa tribes of East Africa, to the south of Lake Tanganyika, “when lightning sets fire to a tree, all the fires in a village are put out, and fireplaces freshly plastered, while the head men take the fire to the chief, who prays over it. It is then sent to all his villages, the people of the villages rewarding his messengers.” See <abbr>Dr.</abbr> J. A. Chisholm, “Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Winamwanga and Wiwa,” <i>Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 36 (July 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 363. The Parsees ascribe peculiar sanctity to fire which has been obtained from a tree struck by lightning. See D. J. Karaka, <i>History of the Modern Parsis</i> (London, 1884), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 213. In Siam and Cambodia such fire is carefully preserved and used to light the funeral pyres of kings and others. See Pallegoix, <i>Description du royaume Thai ou Siam</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 248; J. Moura, <i>Le Royaume du Cambodge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 360.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-821" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-822" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Oscar Peschel, <i>Völkerkunde</i> 6th Ed. (Leipsic, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 138. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Man thinks it likely that the Andaman Islanders got their fire from one of the two volcanoes which exist in their island (<i>On the Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 82). The Creek Indians of North America have a tradition that some of their ancestors procured fire from a volcano. See A. S. Gatschet, <i>A Migration Legend of the Creek Indians</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (<abbr>St.</abbr> Louis, 1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 11 (43).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-822" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-823" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Peschel, <i>loc. cit.</i> As to the fires of Baku see further, <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 159.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-823" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-824" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Taylor, <i>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 367; W. Crooke, <i>Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 194; A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92, 102. Lucretius thought that the first fire was procured either from lightning or from the mutual friction of trees in a high wind (<i>De rerum natura</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1091⁠–⁠1101). The latter source was preferred by Vitruvius (<i>De architectura</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 1).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-824" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-825" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry H. Johnston, <i>ll.cc.</i> Professor K. von den Steinen conjectures that savages, who already possessed fire, and were wont to use tinder to nurse a smouldering brand into a blaze, may have accidentally discovered the mode of kindling fire in an attempt to make tinder by rubbing two dry sticks or reeds against each other. See K. von den Steinen, <i>Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 219⁠–⁠228.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-825" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-826" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Dumont D’Urville, <i>Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de la Perouse</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1832) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 95, 194; Scott Nind, “Description of the Natives of King George’s Sound,” <i>Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1832) <abbr>p.</abbr> 26; E. J. Eyre, <i>Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 357; A. Oldfield, “The Aborigines of Australia,” <i>Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1865) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 283 <i>sq.</i>; J. Dawson, <i>Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 15; <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1845) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 76 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-826" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-827" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Brough Smyth, <i>The Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 396.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-827" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-828" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Taylor, <i>Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 567. Other writers confirm the statement that the carrying of the fire-sticks is the special duty of the women. See W. Stanbridge, “On the Aborigines of Victoria,” <i>Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 291; J. F. Mann, “Notes on the Aborigines of Australia,” <i>Proceedings of the Geographical Society of Australasia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 29.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-828" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-829" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Melville, quoted by H. Ling Roth, <i>The Aborigines of Tasmania</i> (London, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 97. It has sometimes been affirmed that the Tasmanians did not know how to kindle fire; but the evidence collected by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ling Roth (<i>op. cit.</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. <i>sq.</i>, 96 <i>sq.</i>), proves that they were accustomed to light it both by the friction of wood and by striking flints together.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-829" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-830" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dove, quoted by James Bonwick, <i>Daily Life and Origin of the Tasmanians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-830" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-831" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wilfred Powell, <i>Wanderings in a Wild Country</i> (London, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 196.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-831" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-832" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain J. Wilson, <i>Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</i> (London, 1799), <abbr>p.</abbr> 357.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-832" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-833" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Wood, <i>Natural History of Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 522; J. G. Garson, “On the Inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1886). <abbr>p.</abbr> 145; <i>Mission scientifique du Cap Horn</i>, 1882⁠–⁠1883, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (Paris, 1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 345.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-833" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-834" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Ambrosetti, “Los Indios Caingua del alto Paraná (misiones),” <i>Boletino del Instituto Geografico Argentino</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 703 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-834" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-835" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. F. im Thurn, <i>Among the Indians of Guiana</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-835" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-836" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Widenmann, <i>Die Kilimandscharo-Bevölkerung</i> (Gotha, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68 <i>sq.</i> (<i>Petermann’s Mittheilungen: Ergänzungsheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 129).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-836" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-837" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry H. Johnston, <i>British Central Africa</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 438.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-837" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-838" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. F. Mockler-Ferryman, <i>Up the Niger</i> (London, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-838" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-839" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary H. Kingsley, <i>Travels in West Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 599 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-839" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-840" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. de Tournefort, <i>Relation d’un voyage du Levant</i> (Amsterdam, 1718), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 93 (Lettre <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>.); Sibthorp, in R. Walpole’s <i>Memoirs relating to European and Asiatic Turkey</i> (London, 1817), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 284 <i>sq.</i>; W. G. Clark, <i>Peloponnesus</i> (London, 1858), <abbr>p.</abbr> 111; J. T. Bent, <i>The Cyclades</i> (London, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 365. The giant fennel (<i>Ferula communis</i>, L.) is still known in Greece by its ancient name, hardly modified (<i>nartheka</i> instead of <i>narthex</i>), though W. G. Clark says the modern name is <i>kalami</i>. Bent speaks of the plant as a reed, which is a mistake. The plant is described by Theophrastus (<i>Histor. plant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 2. 7 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-840" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-841" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hesiod, <i>Works and Days</i>, 50⁠–⁠52; <i>id.</i>, <i>Theogony</i>, 565⁠–⁠567; Aeschylus, <i>Prometheus Bound</i>, 107⁠–⁠111; Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7. 1; Hyginus, <i>Fabulae</i>, 144; <i>id.</i>, <i>Astronomica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 15.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-841" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-842" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See my article, “The Prytaneum, the Temple of Vesta, the Vestals, Perpetual Fires,” <i>Journal of Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 169⁠–⁠171.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-842" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-843" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 67.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-843" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-844" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See my article, “The Prytaneum, the Temple of Vesta, the Vestals, Perpetual Fires,” <i>Journal of Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 145 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-844" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-845" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Turner, <i>Nineteen Years in Polynesia</i> (London, 1861), <abbr>p.</abbr> 326.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-845" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-846" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ph. Paulitschke, <i>Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die materielle Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 145.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-846" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-847" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. B. Labat, <i>Relation historique de l’Éthiopie Occidentale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 256 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-847" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-848" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 43, 51 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, in a letter to me dated Mengo, Uganda, 3rd August 1904.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-848" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-849" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. G. Browne, <i>Travels in Africa, Egypt, and Syria</i> (London, 1799), <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-849" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-850" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. J. Monteiro, <i>Angola and the River Congo</i> (London, 1875), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 167.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-850" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-851" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Pogge, <i>Im Reiche des Muata Jamwo</i> (Berlin, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 234.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-851" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-852" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Bastian, <i>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 515 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-852" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-853" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Du Pratz, <i>History of Louisiana</i> (London, 1774), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 330⁠–⁠334, 346 <i>sq.</i>, 351⁠–⁠358; Charlevoix, <i>Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 172 <i>sqq.</i>; Lafitau, <i>Mœurs des sauvages Ameriquains</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 167 <i>sq.</i>; <i>Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, Nouvelle Édition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (Paris, 1781) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 7⁠–⁠16 (reprinted in <i>Recueil de voyages au nord</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. Amsterdam, 1737, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3⁠–⁠13); “Relation de la Louisianne,” <i>Recueil de voyages au Nord</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Amsterdam, 1734) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23 <i>sq.</i>; Bossu, <i>Nouveaux Voyages aux Indes Occidentales</i> (Paris, 1768), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 42⁠–⁠44; Chateaubriand, <i>Voyage en Amérique</i> (Paris, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 227 <i>sqq.</i>; H. R. Schoolcraft, <i>Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 68. The accounts differ from each other in some details. Thus Du Pratz speaks as if there were only two fire-temples in the country, whereas the writer in the <i>Lettres édifiantes</i> says that there were eleven villages each with its fire-temple, and that formerly there had been sixty villages and temples. The account in the text is based mainly on the authority of Du Pratz, who lived among the Natchez on terms of intimacy for eight years, from the end of 1718 to 1726.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-853" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-854" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hennepin, <i>Nouvelle Découverte d’un très grand pays situé dans l’Amérique</i> (Utrecht, 1697), <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-854" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-855" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i>Cyropaedia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 3. 12; Ammianus Marcellinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. 6. 34; Quintus Curtius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 3. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-855" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-856" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dio Cassius, lxxi. 35. 5; Herodian, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 8. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 16. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 3. 2, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 8. 6, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 1. 9, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 6. 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-856" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-857" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Schinz, <i>Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 320.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-857" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-858" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Dapper, <i>Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 392.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-858" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-859" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Dapper, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 400.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-859" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-860" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quintus Curtius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 2. 7. Curtius represents this as a signal adopted by Alexander, because the sound of the bugle was lost in the trampling and hum of the great multitude. But this maybe merely the historian’s interpretation of an old custom.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-860" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-861" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i>Respublica Lacedaemoniorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 2 <i>sq.</i>; Nicolaus Damascenus, quoted by Stobaeus, <i>Florilegium</i>, xliv. 41 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 188 <abbr>ed.</abbr> Meineke); Hesychius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> πυρσοφόρος.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-861" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-862" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 68.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-862" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-863" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aeschylus, <i>Choëph.</i> 604 <i>sqq.</i>; Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 8. 2 <i>sq.</i>; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 34. 6 <i>sq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Metamorph.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 445 <i>sqq.</i>; Hyginus, <i>Fab.</i> 171 and 174.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-863" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-864" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius, on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 228.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-864" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-865" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le P. H. Geurtjens, “Le Cérémonial des Voyages aux Îles Keij,” <i>Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-865" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-866" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 237, 321; C. Julian, in Daremberg et Saglio, <i>Dictionnaire des antiquités grecques et romaines</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1173. As to Vesta and the Vestals, see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-866" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-867" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Julian, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-867" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-868" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_186">186</a> note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-868" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-869" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_261">261</a>−263.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-869" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-870" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 114.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-870" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-871" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thus in some African tribes the household fire is put out after a death, and afterwards relit by the friction of sticks (Sir H. H. Johnston, <i>British Central Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 439; L. Concradt, “Die Ngumbu in Südkamerun,” <i>Globus</i>, lxxxi, (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 352). In Laos the fire on the hearth is extinguished after a death and the ashes are scattered; afterwards a new fire is obtained from a neighbour (Tournier, <i>Notice sur le Laos français</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68). A custom of the same sort is observed in Burma, but there the new fire must be bought (C. J. F. S. Forbes, <i>British Burma</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94). Among the Miris of Assam the new fire is made by the widow or widower (W. H. Furness, in <i>Journal of the Anthrop. Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 462). In Armenia it is made by flint and steel (M. Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71). In Argos fire was extinguished after a death, and fresh fire obtained from a neighbour (Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Graec.</i> 24). In the Highlands of Scotland all fires were put out in a house where there was a corpse (Pennant’s “Tour in Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 49). Amongst the Bogos of East Africa no fire may be lit in a house after a death until the body has been carried out (W. Munzinger, <i>Sitten und Recht der Bogos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 67). In the Pelew Islands, when a death has taken place, fire is transferred from the house to a shed erected beside it (J. S. Kubary, “Die Todtenbestattung auf den Pelau-Inseln,” <i>Original-Mittheilungen aus der Ethnologischen Abtheilung der Königlichen Museen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7). In the Marquesas Islands fires were extinguished after a death (Vincendon-Dumoulin et Desgraz, <i>Iles Marquises</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 251). Among the Indians of Peru and the Moors of Algiers no fire might be lighted for several days in a house where a death had occurred (Cieza de Leon, <i>Travels</i>, Markham’s translation, <abbr>p.</abbr> 366; Dapper, <i>Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 176). The same custom is reported of the Mohammedans of India (Mandelsloe, in J. Harris’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (London, 1744) <abbr>p.</abbr> 770). In the East Indian island of Wetter no fire may burn in a house for three days after a death, and according to Bastian the reason is the one given in the text, to wit, a fear that the ghost might fall into it and hurt himself (A. Bastian, <i>Indonesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 60). For more evidence, see my article “On certain Burial Customs,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 90.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-871" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-872" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the list of the Alban kings see Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3. 5⁠–⁠11; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 39⁠–⁠56; <i>id.</i>, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 609 <i>sqq.</i>; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquit. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 70 <i>sq.</i>; Eusebius, <i>Chronic.</i> bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. coll. 273, 275, 285, 287, 289, 291, <abbr>ed.</abbr> A. Schoene; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3rd <abbr>ed.</abbr> L. Dindorf; Sextus Aurelius Victor, <i>Origo gentis Romanae</i>, 17⁠–⁠19; Zonaras, <i>Annales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-872" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-873" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See B. G. Niebuhr, <i>History of Rome</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 205⁠–⁠207; A. Schwegler, <i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 339, 342⁠–⁠345. However, Niebuhr admits that some of the names may have been taken from older legends.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-873" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-874" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. M. Stanley, <i>Through the Dark Continent</i> (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 380; C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, <i>Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 197; <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlman, <i>Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 192 <i>sq.</i>; J. Roscoe, “Farther Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 25, with plates <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>.; Sir Harry Johnston, <i>The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 681 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-874" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-875" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Romulus and Tatius reigned for a time together; after Romulus the kings were, in order of succession, Numa Pompilius, Tullus Hostilius, Ancus Marcius, the elder Tarquin, Servius Tullius, and Tarquin the Proud.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-875" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-876" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See A. Schwegler, <i>Römische Geschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 579 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-876" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-877" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to one account, Romulus had a son and a daughter (Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 14). Some held that Numa had four sons (Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 21). Ancus Marcius left two sons (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 35. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 40; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 72 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 34. 3). Tarquin the Elder left two sons or grandsons (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 46; Dionysius Halic., <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 6 <i>sq.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 28).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-877" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-878" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pompilia, the mother of Ancus Marcius, was a daughter of Numa. See Cicero, <i>De re publica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 18. 33; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 32. 1; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 76. 5, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 35. 3, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 36. 2; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 21.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-878" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-879" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Numa married Tatia, the daughter of Tatius (Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 3 and 21); Servius Tullius married the daughter of the elder Tarquin (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 39. 4); and Tarquin the Proud married Tullia the daughter of Servius Tullius (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 42. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 46. 5).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-879" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-880" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Numa was a Sabine from Cures (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 18; Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 3; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 58); Servius Tullius, according to the common account, was the son of Ocrisia, a slave woman of Corniculum (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 39. 5; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 1.), but according to another account he was an Etruscan (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_196">196</a> note); and Tarquin the Proud was a son of the elder Tarquin, who was an Etruscan from Tarquinii (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 34; Cicero, <i>De re publica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 19 <i>sq.</i>, §§ 34 <i>sq.</i>). The foreign birth of their kings naturally struck the Romans themselves. See the speech put by Livy (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 35. 3), in the mouth of the elder Tarquin: <i>“Se non rem novam petere, quippe qui non primus, quod quisquam indignari mirarive posset, sed tertius Romae peregrinus regnum adfectet; et Tatium non ex peregrino solum sed etiam ex hoste regem factum, et Numam ignarum urbis non petentem in regnum ultro accitum: se, ex quo sui potens fuerit, Romam cum conjuge ac fortunis omnibus commigrasse.</i>” And see a passage in a speech actually spoken by the Emperor Claudius: “<i>Quondam reges hanc tenuere urbem, nec tamen domesticis successoribus eam tradere contigit. Supervenere alieni et quidem externi, ut Numa Romulo successerit ex Sabinis veniens, vicinus quidem sed tunec externus</i>,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The speech is engraved on bronze tablets found at Lyons. See Tacitus, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Baiter and Orelli, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2nd Ed., <abbr>p.</abbr> 342.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-880" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-881" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“In Ceylon, where the higher and lower polyandry co-exist, marriage is of two sorts⁠—Deega or Beena⁠—according as the wife goes to live in the house and village of her husbands, or as the husband or husbands come to live with her in or near the house of her birth” (J. F. McLennan, <i>Studies in Ancient History</i> (London, 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 101).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-881" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-882" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The system of mother-kin, that is, of tracing descent through females instead of through males, is often called the matriarchate. But this term is inappropriate and misleading, as it implies that under the system in question the women govern the men. Even when the so-called matriarchate regulates the descent of the kingdom, this does not mean that the women of the royal family reign; it only means that they are the channel through which the kingship is transmitted to their husbands or sons.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-882" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-883" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ancient writers repeatedly speak of the uncertainty as to the fathers of the Roman kings. See Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 4. 2; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 2. 3; Cicero, <i>De re publica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 18. 33; Seneca, <i>Epist.</i> cviii. 30; Aelian, <i>Var. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 36.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-883" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-884" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 773⁠–⁠784; Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 17. Compare L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 180 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-884" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-885" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 266 <i>sqq.</i>, 328 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-885" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-886" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 203 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 318 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-886" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-887" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-887" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-888" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>T. E. Bowdich, <i>Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee</i>, New Edition (London, 1873), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185, 204 <i>sq.</i>; A. B. Ellis, <i>The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 287, 297 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 187.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-888" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-889" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 36, 67. In Benin “the legitimate daughters of a king did not <i>marry</i> any one, but bestowed their favours as they pleased.” (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. Punch, in H. Ling Roth’s <i>Great Benin</i> (Halifax, England, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 37).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-889" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-890" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin, <i>Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 200; J. Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 67.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-890" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-891" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Roscoe, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 27, 62. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Roscoe says: “The royal family traces its pedigree through the maternal clan, but the nation through the paternal clan.” But he here refers to the descent of the totem only. That the throne descends from father to son is proved by the genealogical tables which he gives (Plates I. and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-891" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-892" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Proyart’s “History of Loango,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 570, 579 <i>sq.</i>; L. Degrandpré, <i>Voyage à la côte occidentale d’Afrique</i> (Paris, 1801), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 110⁠–⁠114; A. Bastian, <i>Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 197 <i>sqq.</i> Time seems not to have mitigated the lot of these unhappy prince consorts. See R. E. Dennett, <i>At the Back of the Black Man’s Mind</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 36 <i>sq.</i>, 134. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dennett says that the husband of a princess is virtually her slave and may be put to death by her. All the sisters of the King of Loango enjoy these arbitrary rights over their husbands, and the offspring of any of them may become king.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-892" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-893" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Guillemé, “Au Bengouéolo,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 16. The writer visited the state and had an interview with the queen, a woman of gigantic stature, wearing many amulets.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-893" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-894" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-894" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-895" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 29. 4. I have to thank <abbr>Mr.</abbr> H. M. Chadwick for pointing out the following Greek and Swedish parallels to what I conceive to have been the Latin practice.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-895" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-896" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 72. 7. According to Apollodorus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 12. 7), Cychreus, King of Salamis, died childless, and bequeathed his kingdom to Telamon.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-896" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-897" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Tzetzes, <i>Schol. on Lycophron</i>, 450. Compare Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 29. 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-897" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-898" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 13. 1. According to Diodorus Siculus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 72. 6), the king of Phthia was childless, and bequeathed his kingdom to Peleus.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-898" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-899" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 13. 8; Hyginus, <i>Fabulae</i>, 96.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-899" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-900" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 11. 1 <i>sq.</i>; Justin, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-900" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-901" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 8. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-901" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-902" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Antoninus Liberalis, <i>Transform.</i> 37; Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 459 <i>sq.</i>, 510 <i>sq.</i> Compare Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 243 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-902" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-903" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 73; Hyginus, <i>Fabulae</i>, 82⁠–⁠84; Servius, on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-903" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-904" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thucydides, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 6. 19, <abbr>p.</abbr> 377.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-904" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-905" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 10. 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-905" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-906" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Schol. on Euripides, <i>Orestes</i>, 46; Pindar, <i>Pyth.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 31 <i>sq.</i>; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 19. 6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-906" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-907" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. M. Chadwick, <i>The Origin of the English Nation</i> (Cambridge, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 332 <i>sq.</i> In treating of the succession to the kingdom in Scandinavia, the late K. Maurer, one of the highest authorities on old Norse law, also remarked that “some ancient authorities (<i>Quellenberichte</i>) profess to know of a certain right of succession accorded to women, in virtue of which under certain circumstances, though they could not themselves succeed to the kingdom, they nevertheless could convey it to their husbands.” And he cites a number of instances, how one king (Eysteinn Halfdanarson) succeeded his father-in-law (Eirikr Agnarsson) on the throne; how another (Gudrodr Halfdanarson) received with his wife Alfhildr a portion of her father’s kingdom; and so on. See K. Maurer, <i>Vorlesungen über altnordische Rechtsgeschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipsic, 1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 233 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-907" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-908" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. W. Dasent, <i>Popular Tales from the Norse</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131 <i>sqq.</i>; S. Grundtvig, <i>Dänische Volksmärchen</i>, First Series (Leipsic, 1878), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 285 <i>sqq.</i> (Leo’s German translation); Cavallius und Stephens, <i>Schwedische Volkssagen und Märchen</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 4, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <i>sqq.</i> (Oberleitner’s German translation); Grimm, <i>Household Tales</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 60; Kuhn und Schwartz, <i>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 340 <i>sqq.</i>; J. W. Wolf, <i>Deutsche Hausmärchen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 372 <i>sqq.</i>; Philo vom Walde, <i>Schlesien in Sage und Brauch</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81 <i>sqq.</i>; I. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Zingerle, <i>Kinder- und Hausmärchen aus Tirol</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 8, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35 <i>sqq.</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 35, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 178 <i>sqq.</i>; J. Haltrich, <i>Deutsche Volksmärchen aus dem Sachsenlande in Siebenbürgen</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 15, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 103 <i>sqq.</i>; J. F. Campbell, <i>Popular Tales of the West Highlands</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 4, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77 <i>sqq.</i>; A. Schleicher, <i>Litauische Märchen, Sprichwörte, Rätsel und Lieder</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 57 <i>sqq.</i>; A. Leskien und K. Brugmann, <i>Litauische Volkslieder und Märchen</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 14, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 404 <i>sqq.</i>; Basile, <i>Pentamerone</i>, First day, seventh tale, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <i>sqq.</i> (Liebrecht’s German translation); E. Legrand, <i>Contes populaires grecques</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 169 <i>sqq.</i>; J. G. von Hahn, <i>Griechische und albanesische Märchen</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 98, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 114 <i>sq.</i>; A. und A. Schott, <i>Walachische Maehrchen</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 10, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 140 <i>sqq.</i>; W. Webster, <i>Basque Legends</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 36⁠–⁠38; A. Schiefner, <i>Awarische Texte</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1873), <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21 <i>sqq.</i>; J. Rivière, <i>Contes populaires de la Kabylie</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 195⁠–⁠197.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-908" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-909" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Saxo Grammaticus, <i>Historia Danica</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 126 (Elton’s translation). The passage occurs on <abbr>p.</abbr> 158 of P. E. Müller’s edition of Saxo.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-909" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-910" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The story of Hamlet (Amleth) is told, in a striking form, by Saxo Grammaticus in the third and fourth books of his history. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> H. M. Chadwick tells me that Hamlet stands on the border-line between legend and history. Hence the main outlines of his story may be correct.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-910" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-911" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7⁠–⁠13.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-911" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-912" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicolaus Damascenus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. frag. 49, in <i>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 380.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-912" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-913" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 11, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 515 <span class="fss">F</span>−516 <span class="fss">B</span>; Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 6. 3; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 31; Joannes Lydus, <i>De magistratibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 64; Lucian, <i>Dialogi deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 2; Ovid, <i>Heroides</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 55 <i>sqq.</i>; Statius, <i>Theb.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 646⁠–⁠649.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-913" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-914" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Athenaeus, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-914" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-915" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 93; Clearchus, quoted by Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 11, <abbr>p.</abbr> 516 <span class="fss">A B</span>. The Armenians also prostituted their daughters before marriage, dedicating them for a long time to the profligate worship of the goddess Anaitis (Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 14. 16, <abbr>p.</abbr> 532 <i>sq.</i>). The custom was probably practised as a charm to secure the fertility of the earth as well as of man and beast. See <i>Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-915" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-916" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-916" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-917" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clearchus, quoted by Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 31, <abbr>p.</abbr> 573 <span class="fss">A B</span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-917" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-918" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See E. A. Freeman, <i>History of the Norman Conquest of England</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3rd Ed., 410⁠–⁠412, 733⁠–⁠737. I am indebted to my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> H. M. Chadwick both for the fact and its explanation.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-918" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-919" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Procopius, <i>De bello Gothico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 20 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 593, <abbr>ed.</abbr> J. Haury). This and the following cases of marriage with a stepmother are cited by K. Weinhold, <i>Deutsche Frauen</i> 2nd Ed., (Vienna, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 359 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-919" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-920" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bede, <i>Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5. 102; compare <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 27. 63.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-920" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-921" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Prudentius Trecensis, “Annales,” anno 858, in Pertz’s <i>Monumenta Germaniae historica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 451; Ingulfus, <i>Historia</i>, quoted <i>ibid.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-921" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-922" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is in substance the view of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> W. E. Hearn (<i>The Aryan House-hold</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 150⁠–⁠155) and of <abbr>Prof.</abbr> B. Delbrück (“Das Mutterrecht bei den Indogermanen,” <i>Preussische Jahrbücher</i>, lxxix. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 14⁠–⁠27).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-922" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-923" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clearchus of Soli, quoted by Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 2. <abbr>p.</abbr> 555 <span class="fss">D</span>; John of Antioch, in <i>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 547; Charax of Pergamus <i>ib.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 638; J. Tzetzes, <i>Schol. on Lycophron</i>, 111; <i>id.</i>, <i>Chiliades</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 650⁠–⁠665; Suidas, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Κέκροψ; Justin, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 6. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-923" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-924" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ὁ μὲν οὖν ἀθηναῖος Σόλων ὁμοπατρίους ἐφεὶς ἄγεσθαι, τὰς ὁμομητρίους ἐκώλυσεν, ὁ δὲ Λακεδαιμονίων νομοθέτης ἔμπαλιν, τὸν ἐπὶ ταῖς ὁμογαστρίοις γάμον ἐπιτρέψας, τὸν πρὸς τὰς ὁμοπατρίους ἀπεῖπεν, Philo Judaeus, <i>De specialibus legibus</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 303, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Th. Mangey. See also Plutarch, <i>Themistocles</i>, 32; Cornelius Nepos, <i>Cimon</i>, 1; Schol. on Aristophanes, <i>Clouds</i>, 1371; L. Beauchet, <i>Histoire du droit privé de la République Athénienne</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <i>sqq.</i> Compare Minucius Felix, <i>Octavius</i>, 31.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-924" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-925" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-925" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-926" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 1. 40, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 600 <i>sq.</i>; Plutarch, <i>De sera numinis vindicta</i>, 12; and especially Lycophron, <i>Cassandra</i>, 1141 <i>sqq.</i>, with the scholia of J. Tzetzes, who refers to Timaeus and Callimachus as his authorities.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-926" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-927" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Justin, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. 3. 1⁠–⁠6.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-927" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-928" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 4. 18.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-928" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-929" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Germania</i>, 20. Compare L. Dargun, <i>Mutterrecht und Raubehe und ihre Reste im germanischen Recht und Leben</i> (Breslau, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-929" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-930" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Giraud-Teulon, <i>Les Origines du mariage et de la famille</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 206 <i>sqq.</i>; A. H. Post, <i>Afrikanische Jurisprudenz</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 13 <i>sqq.</i>; Sir Harry H. Johnston, <i>British Central Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 471; A. B. Ellis, <i>The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 207 <i>sqq.</i> Much more evidence will be found in my <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-930" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-931" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. H. Codrington, <i>The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 50, note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-931" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-932" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Germania</i>, 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-932" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-933" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. Howitt, <i>Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 286 <i>sqq.</i> The <i>reipus</i> or payment made on the remarriage of a widow is discussed by L. Dargun, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141⁠–⁠152.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-933" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-934" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. F. Skene held that the Picts were Celts. See his <i>Celtic Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 194⁠–⁠227. On the other hand, H. Zimmer supposes them to have been the pre-Celtic inhabitants of the British Islands. See his paper “Das Mutterrecht der Pikten,” <i>Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1894) Romanistische Abtheilung, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 209 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-934" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-935" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i>Cumque uxores Picti non habentes peterent a Scottis, ea solum conditione dare consenserunt, ut ubi res perveniret in dubium, magis de feminea regum prosapia quam de masculina regem sibi eligerent; quod usque hodie apud Pictos constat esse servatum</i>,” Bede, <i>Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-935" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-936" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. F. Skene, <i>Celtic Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 232⁠–⁠235; J. F. McLennan, <i>Studies in Ancient History</i> (London, 1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68⁠–⁠70; H. Zimmer, <i>loc. cit.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-936" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-937" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. O. Müller, <i>Die Etrusker</i> (Stuttgart, 1877), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 376 <i>sq.</i>; J. J. Bachofen, <i>Die Sage von Tanaquil</i> (Heidelberg, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 282⁠–⁠290.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-937" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-938" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Θεόπομπος δ’ ἐν τῇ τεσσαρακοστῇ τρίτῃ τῶν ἱστοριῶν καὶ νόμον εἶναί φησι παρὰ τοῖς Τυρρηνοῖς κοινὰς ὑπάρχειν τὰς γυναῖκας⁠ ⁠… τρέφειν δὲ τοὺς Τυρρηνοὺς πάντα τὰ γινόμενα παιδία, οὐκ εἰδότας ὅτου πάτρος ἐστὶν ἕκαστον, Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 14, <abbr>p.</abbr> 517 <span class="fss">D E</span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-938" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-939" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i>Non enim hic, ubi ex Tusco modo Tute tibi indigne dotem quaeras corpore</i>” (Plautus, <i>Cistellaria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 3. 20 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-939" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-940" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 94; Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 2. 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 219; Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 55; Timaeus, cited by Tertullian, <i>De spectaculis</i>, 5; Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Turannos,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 355, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 2; Velleius Paterculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 4; Justin, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. 1. 7; Valerius Maximus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 4. 4; Servius, on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 67. On the other hand, Dionysius of Halicarnassus held that the Etruscans were an indigenous Italian race, differing from all other known peoples in language and customs (<i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 26⁠–⁠30). On this much-vexed question, see K. O. Müller, <i>Die Etrusker</i> (Stuttgart, 1877), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 65 <i>sqq.</i>; G. Dennis, <i>Cities and Cemeteries of Etruria</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. <i>sqq.</i>; F. Hommel, <i>Grundriss der Geographie und Geschichte des Alten Orients</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 63 <i>sqq.</i> (in Iwan von Müller’s <i>Handbuch der klassischen Altertumswissenschaft</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-940" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-941" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is doubtful whether Servius Tullius was a Latin or an Etruscan. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_195">195</a>, note 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-941" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-942" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“All over India the hedge-priest is very often an autochthon, his long residence in the land being supposed to confer upon him the knowledge of the character and peculiarities of the local gods, and to teach him the proper mode in which they may be conciliated. Thus the Doms preserve to the present day the animistic and demonistic beliefs of the aboriginal races, which the Khasiyas, who have succeeded them, temper with the worship of the village deities, the named and localised divine entities, with the occasional languid cult of the greater Hindu gods. The propitiation of the vague spirits of wood, or cliff, river or lake, they are satisfied to leave in charge of their serfs” (W. Crooke, <i>Natives of Northern India</i>, London, 1907, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 104 <i>sq.</i>). When the Israelites had been carried away captives into Assyria, the new settlers in the desolate land of Israel were attacked by lions, which they supposed to be sent against them by the god of the country because, as strangers, they did not know how to propitiate him. So they petitioned the king of Assyria and he sent them a native Israelitish priest, who taught them how to worship the God of Israel. See 2 Kings <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 24⁠–⁠28.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-942" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-943" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Jordan, <i>Die Könige im alten Italien</i> (Berlin, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15⁠–⁠25.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-943" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-944" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 56. 7; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 68. 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-944" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-945" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 34. 2 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 38. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 57. 6; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 64.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-945" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-946" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I owe to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook the interesting suggestion that the double consulship was a revival of a double kingship.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-946" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-947" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the <i>Regifugium</i> see below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_308">308</a>−310.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-947" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-948" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 5. 10; G. Gilbert, <i>Handbuch der griech. Staatsalterthümer</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 2nd Ed., 122 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-948" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-949" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The two supreme magistrates who replaced the kings were at first called praetors. See Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 55. 12; B. G. Niebuhr, <i>History of Rome</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 520 <i>sq.</i>; Th. Mommsen, <i>Römisches Staatsrecht</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 3rd Ed., 74 <i>sqq.</i> That the power of the first consuls was, with the limitations indicated in the text, that of the old kings is fully recognised by Livy (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 7 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-949" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-950" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It was a disputed point whether Tarquin the Proud was the son or grandson of Tarquin the Elder. Most writers, and Livy (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 46. 4) among them, held that he was a son. Dionysius of Halicarnassus, on the other hand, argued that he must have been a grandson; he insists strongly on the chronological difficulties to which the ordinary hypothesis is exposed if Servius Tullius reigned, as he is said to have reigned, forty-four years. See Dionysius Halic. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 6 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-950" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-951" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 48. 2; Dionysius Halic. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 31 <i>sq.</i> and 46.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-951" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-952" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 56; Dionysius Halic. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 67⁠–⁠69, 77; Valerius Maximus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3. 2; Aurelius Victor, <i>De viris illustribus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. The murder of Brutus’s father and brother is recorded by Dionysius; the other writers mention the assassination of his brother only. The resemblance between Brutus and Hamlet has been pointed out before. See F. York Powell, in Elton’s translation of Saxo Grammaticus’s <i>Danish History</i> (London, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 405⁠–⁠410.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-952" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-953" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Livingstone, <i>Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 617 <i>sq.</i> Many more examples are given by A. H. Post, <i>Afrikanische Jurisprudenz</i> (Oldenburg and Leipsic), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 134 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-953" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-954" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Livingstone, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 434.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-954" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-955" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Hecquard, <i>Reise an die Küste und in das Innere von West-Afrika</i> (Leipsic, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 104. This and the preceding example are cited by A. H. Post, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-955" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-956" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. A. Chisholm, “Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Winamwanga and Wiwa,” <i>Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 36 (July 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 384.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-956" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-957" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Spieth, <i>Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 784 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-957" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-958" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir William MacGregor, “Lagos, Abeokuta, and the Alake,” <i>Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 12 (July 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 470 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-958" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-959" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Partridge, “The Burial of the Atta of Igaraland, and the ‘Coronation’ of his Successor,” <i>Blackwood’s Magazine</i>, September 1904, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 329 <i>sq.</i> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Partridge kindly gave me some details as to the election of the king in a letter dated 24th October 1904. He is Assistant District Commissioner in Southern Nigeria.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-959" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-960" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major P. R. T. Gurdon, <i>The Khasis</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 66⁠–⁠75.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-960" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-961" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 17; Cicero, <i>De re publica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 17. 31.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-961" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-962" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the nomination of the King of the Sacred Rites see Livy, xl. 42; Dionysius Halic. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 4. The latter writer says that the augurs co-operated with the pontiff in the nomination.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-962" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-963" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Mommsen, <i>Römisches Staatsrecht</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 3rd Ed., 6⁠–⁠8; A. H. J. Greenidge, <i>Roman Public Life</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 45 <i>sqq.</i> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Greenidge thinks that the king was regularly nominated by his predecessor and only occasionally by an interim king. Mommsen holds that he was always nominated by the latter.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-963" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-964" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare Lucretius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1108 <i>sqq.</i>:<br/>
					<div class="c007 lg-container-b"><div class="linegroup"><div class="group"><div class="line">“<i>Condere coeperunt urbis arcemque locare</i></div> <div class="line"><i>Praesidium reges ipsi sibi perfugiumque,</i></div> <div class="line"><i>Et pecus atque agros divisere atque dedere</i></div> <div class="line"><i>Pro facie cujusque et viribus ingenioque;</i></div> <div class="line"><i>Nam facies multum valuit viresque vigentes.</i>”</div></div></div></div> <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-964" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-965" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicolaus Damascenus, in Stobaeus, <i>Florilegium</i>, xliv. 41 (<i>Frag. Histor. Graec.</i> <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 463). Other writers say simply that the tallest, strongest, or handsomest man was chosen king. See Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 20; Aristotle, <i>Politics</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 4; Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 20, <abbr>p.</abbr> 566 c.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-965" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-966" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Zenobius, <i>Cent.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 25.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-966" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-967" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Shooter, <i>The Kafirs of Natal</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4 <i>sq.</i> Compare D. Livingstone, <i>Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186; W. Max Müller, <i>Asien und Europa</i> (Leipsic, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 110.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-967" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-968" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Zenobius, <i>Cent.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 25.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-968" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-969" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 21, <abbr>p.</abbr> 492.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-969" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-970" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hippocrates, <i>De aere locis et aquis</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 550 <i>sq.</i> <abbr>ed.</abbr> Kühn).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-970" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-971" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain Guy Burrows, <i>The Land of the Pigmies</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 95. Speaking of this tribe, Emin Pasha observes: “The most curious custom, however, and one which is particularly observed in the ruling families, is bandaging the heads of infants. By means of these bandages a lengthening of the head along its horizontal axis is produced; and whereas the ordinary Monbutto people have rather round heads, the form of the head in the better classes shows an extraordinary increase in length, which certainly very well suits their style of hair and of hats.” See <i>Emin Pasha in Central Africa, being a Collection of Letters and Journals</i> (London, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 212.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-971" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-972" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lewis and Clark, <i>Expedition to the Sources of the Missouri</i>, ch. 23, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 327 <i>sq.</i> (reprinted at London, 1905); D. W. Harmon, quoted by <abbr>Rev.</abbr> J. Morse, <i>Report to the Secretary of War of the United States on Indian Affairs</i> (Newhaven, 1822), Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 346; H. R. Schoolcraft, <i>Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 325 <i>sq.</i>; R. C. Mayne, <i>Four Years in British Columbia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 277; G. M. Sproat, <i>Scenes and Studies of Savage Life</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28⁠–⁠30; H. H. Bancroft, <i>Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 180.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-972" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-973" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Hill-Tout, <i>The Far West, the Home of the Salish and Déné</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>p.</abbr> 40. As to the custom in general among these tribes, see <i>ibid.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 38⁠–⁠41. In Melanesia the practice of artificially lengthening the head into a cone by means of bandages applied in infancy is observed by the natives of Malikolo (Malekula) in the New Hebrides and also by the natives of the south coast of New Britain, from Cape Roebuck to Cape Bedder. See Beatrice Grimshaw, <i>From Fiji to the Cannibal Islands</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 258⁠–⁠260; R. Parkinson, <i>Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i> (Stuttgart, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204⁠–⁠206.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-973" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-974" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>V. Fric and P. Radin, “Contributions to the Study of the Bororo Indians,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 388 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-974" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-975" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i>The Spectator</i>, Nos. 18 and 20.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-975" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-976" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicolaus Damascenus, in Stobaeus, <i>Florilegium</i>, xliv. 41 (<i>Fragmenta Historic. Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 463).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-976" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-977" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Simon Grunau, <i>Preussische Chronik</i>, Tract. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. cap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. § 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 66, <abbr>ed.</abbr> M. Perlbach. This passage was pointed out to me by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> H. M. Chadwick.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-977" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-978" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 20. 9.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-978" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-979" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <i>Epitoma</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 4⁠–⁠9, <abbr>ed.</abbr> R. Wagner (Apollodorus, <i>Bibliotheca</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> R. Wagner, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <i>sq.</i>); Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 73; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 6 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 10. 6 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 14. 7, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 17. 7 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 20. 6 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 21. 7⁠–⁠11.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-979" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-980" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 21. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-980" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-981" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 13. 1⁠–⁠6, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 20. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-981" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-982" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 12. 1, 20. 10 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-982" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-983" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pindar, <i>Pyth.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 181⁠–⁠220, with the Scholia.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-983" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-984" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pindar, <i>Pyth.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 195 <i>sqq.</i>; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 12. 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-984" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-985" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 9. 2; Hyginus, <i>Fab.</i> 185; Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 560 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-985" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-986" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Schuyler, <i>Turkistan</i> (London, 1876), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 42 <i>sq.</i> This and the four following examples of the bride-race have been already cited by J. F. McLennan, <i>Studies in Ancient History</i> (London, 1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15 <i>sq.</i>, 181⁠–⁠184. He supposes them to be relics of a custom of capturing women from another community.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-986" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-987" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. D. Clarke, <i>Travels in Various Countries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (London, 1810), <abbr>p.</abbr> 333. In the fourth octavo edition of Clarke’s <i>Travels</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>., London, 1816), from which McLennan seems to have quoted, there are a few verbal changes.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-987" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-988" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. McLennan, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <i>sq.</i>, referring to Kennan’s <i>Tent Life in Siberia</i> (1870), which I have not seen. Compare W. Jochelson, “The Koryak” (Leyden and New York, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 742 (<i>Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>.).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-988" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-989" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of the missionary Bigandet, dated March 1847, in <i>Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1848) <abbr>p.</abbr> 431. A similar account of the ceremony is given by M. Bourien, “Wild Tribes of the Malay Peninsula,” <i>Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1865) <abbr>p.</abbr> 81. See further W. W. Skeat and C.O. Blagden, <i>Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</i> (London, 1906), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 68, 77 <i>sq.</i>, 79 <i>sq.</i>, 82 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-989" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-990" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Cameron, <i>Our Tropical Possessions in Malayan India</i> (London, 1865), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 116 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-990" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-991" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i>The Essential Kafir</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 219.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-991" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-992" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Middle High German <i>brûtlouf</i>, modern German <i>Brautlauf</i>, Anglo-Saxon <i>brydhléap</i>, old Norse <i>brudhlaup</i>, modern Norse <i>bryllup</i>. See Grimm, <i>Deutsches Wörterbuch</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Brautlauf”; K. Weinhold, <i>Deutsche Frauen</i>, 2nd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 407. The latter writer supposes the word to refer merely to the procession from the house of the bride to the house of the bridegroom. But Grimm is most probably right in holding that originally it applied to a real race for the bride. This is the view also of K. Simrock (<i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 5th Ed. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 598 <i>sq.</i>). Another writer sees in it a trace of marriage by capture (L. Dargun, <i>Mutterrecht und Raubehe</i> (Breslau, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 130). Compare K. Schmidt, <i>Jus primae noctis</i> (Freiburg <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. B. 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 129.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-992" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-993" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Kuhn, <i>Märkische Sagen und Märchen</i> (Berlin, 1843), <abbr>p.</abbr> 358.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-993" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-994" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Kolbe, <i>Hessische Volks-sitten und Gebräuche</i> (Marburg, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 150 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-994" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-995" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lentner and Dahn, in <i>Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Munich, 1860) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 398 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-995" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-996" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Brand, <i>Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 153⁠–⁠155 (Bohn’s edition); J. Jamieson, <i>Dictionary of the Scottish Language</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Broose.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-996" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-997" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. Herrmann, “Über Lieder und Bräuche bei Hochzeiten in Kärnten,” <i>Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-997" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-998" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicolaus Damascenus, quoted by Stobaeus, <i>Florilegium</i>, xliv. 41; <i>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 457.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-998" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-999" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 4. 12, <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-999" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arthur Young, “Tour in Ireland,” in Pinkerton’s <i>Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 860.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1000" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1001" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Mahabharata</i>, condensed into English by Romesch Dutt (London, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15 <i>sqq.</i>; J. C. Oman, <i>The Great Indian Epics</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 109 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1001" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1002" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. D. Mayne, <i>A Treatise on Hindu Law and Usage</i> 3rd Ed., (Madras and London, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 56; <i>The Vikramânkadevacharita</i>, edited by G. Bühler (Bombay, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 38⁠–⁠40; A. Holtzmann, <i>Das Mahābharata und seine Theile</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Kiel, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21 <i>sq.</i>; J. Jolly, <i>Recht und Sitte</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50 <i>sq.</i> (in G. Bühler’s <i>Grundriss der indo-arischen Philologie</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1002" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1003" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Book of Ser Marco Polo.</i>, Yule’s translation, 2nd Ed., bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. ch. 4, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 461⁠–⁠463.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1003" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1004" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>The Lay of the Nibelungs</i>, translated by Alice Horton (London, 1898), Adventures <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1004" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1005" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Parthenius, <i>Narrat. Amat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. This passage was pointed out to me by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook, who has himself discussed the contest for the kingship. See his article, “The European Sky-god,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 376 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1005" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1006" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 126⁠–⁠130. It is to be observed that in this and other of the examples cited above the succession to the kingdom did not pass with the hand of the princess.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1006" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1007" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_69">69</a>, <a href="#Page_84">84</a>, <a href="#Page_90">90</a> <i>sq.</i> These customs were observed at Whitsuntide, not on May Day. But the Whitsuntide king and queen are obviously equivalent to the King and Queen of May. Hence I allow myself to use the latter and more familiar titles so as to include the former.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1007" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1008" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 685 <i>sqq.</i>; Plutarch, <i>Quaest. Rom.</i> 63; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 323 <i>sq.</i>; W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 327 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1008" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1009" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Another proposed explanation of the <i>regifugium</i> is that the king fled because at the sacrifice he had incurred the guilt of slaying a sacred animal. See W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 328 <i>sqq.</i> The best-known example of such a ritual flight is that of the men who slew the ox at the Athenian festival of the <i>Bouphonia</i>. See <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 294. Amongst the Pawnees the four men who assisted at the sacrifice of a girl to Ti-ra’-wa used to run away very fast after the deed was done and wash themselves in the river. See G. B. Grinnell, <i>Pawnee Hero Stories and Folk-Tales</i> (New York, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 365 <i>sq.</i> Among the ancient Egyptians the man whose duty it was to slit open a corpse for the purpose of embalming it fled as soon as he had done his part, pursued by all the persons present, who pelted him with stones and cursed him, “turning as it were the pollution on him; for they suppose that any one who violates or wounds or does any harm to the person of a fellow-tribesman is hateful” (Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 91. 4). Similarly in the western islands of Torres Straits the man whose duty it was to decapitate a corpse for the purpose of preserving the skull was shot at with arrows by the relatives of the deceased as an expiation for the injury he had done to the corpse of their kinsman. See <i>Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Cambridge, 1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249, 251. This explanation of the <i>regifugium</i> certainly deserves to be considered. But on this as on so many other points of ancient ritual we can hardly hope ever to attain to certainty.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1009" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1010" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Cumont, “Les Actes de S. Dasius,” <i>Analecta Bollandiana</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5⁠–⁠16. See further <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Parmentier and Cumont, “Le Roi des Saturnales,” <i>Revue de Philologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 143⁠–⁠153; <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 138 <i>sqq.</i> The tomb of <abbr>St.</abbr> Dasius, a Christian soldier who was put to death at Durostorum in 303 <span class="fss"><abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr></span> after refusing to play the part of Saturn at the festival, has since been discovered at Ancona. A Greek inscription on the tomb records that the martyr’s remains were brought thither from Durostorum. See F. Cumont, “Le Tombeau de S. Dasius de Durostorum,” <i>Analecta Bollandiana</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 369⁠–⁠372. Professor A. Erhard of Strasburg, who has been engaged for years in preparing an edition of the <i>Acta Martyrum</i> for the Berlin Corpus of Greek Fathers, informed me in conversation at Cambridge in the summer of 1910 that he ranks the Acts of <abbr>St.</abbr> Dasius among the authentic documents of their class. The plain unvarnished narrative bears indeed the stamp of truth on its face.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1010" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1011" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 15; Arrian, <i>Epicteti dissert.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 25. 8; Lucian, <i>Saturnalia</i>, 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1011" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1012" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to these temporary kings see <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 24 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1012" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1013" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, <i>Rerum rusticarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1. 5; Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 324; Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 3. 35; Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 19. Compare Wissowa, in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 433 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1013" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1014" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On Saturn as the god of sowing and the derivation of his name from a root meaning “to sow,” from which comes <i>satus</i> “sowing,” see Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 64; Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Opima spolia,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 186, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 2, 3. 13, 15; Wissowa, in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 428. The derivation is confirmed by the form Saeturnus which occurs in an inscription (<i>Saeturni pocolom</i>, H. Dessau, <i>Inscript. Latinae selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2966). As to the Saturnalia see L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 15 <i>sqq.</i>; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 586 <i>sqq.</i>; Dezobry, <i>Rome au siècle d’Auguste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 143 <i>sqq.</i>; W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 268 <i>sqq.</i> The festival was held from the seventeenth to the twenty-third of December. I formerly argued that in the old days, when the Roman year began with March instead of with January, the Saturnalia may have been held from the seventeenth to the twenty-third of February, in which case the festival must have immediately preceded the Flight of the King, which fell on February the twenty-fourth. See <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 144 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266. But this attempt to bring the ancient Saturnalia into immediate juxtaposition to the King’s Flight breaks down when we observe, as my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Warde Fowler has pointed out to me, that the Saturnalia fell in December under the Republic, long before Caesar, in his reform of the calendar, had shifted the commencement of the year from March to January. See Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. 1. 19 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1014" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1015" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Roman farmers sowed wheat, spelt, and barley in December, flax up to the seventh of that month, and beans up to the eleventh (the festival of Septimontium). See Palladius, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 1. In the lowlands of Sicily at the present day November and December are the months of sowing, but in the highlands August and September. See G. Pitrè, <i>Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Palermo, 1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 132 <i>sqq.</i> Hence we may suppose that in the Roman Campagna of old the last sowing of autumn was over before the middle of December, when the Saturnalia began.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1015" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1016" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This temporary liberty accorded to slaves was one of the most remarkable features of the Saturnalia and kindred festivals in antiquity. See <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 139 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1016" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1017" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The learned Swiss scholar, J. J. Bachofen long ago drew out in minute detail the parallel between these birth legends of the Roman kings and licentious festivals like the Roman Saturnalia and the Babylonian Sacaea. See his book <i>Die Sage von Tanaquil</i> (Heidelberg, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 133 <i>sqq.</i> To be frank, I have not had the patience to read through his long dissertation.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1017" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1018" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 16; Dionysius Halic. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 56; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 27; Florus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1. 16 <i>sq.</i> See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_181">181</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1018" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1019" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 18; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 29; <i>id.</i>, <i>Camillus</i>, 33; Macrobius, <i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 11. 36⁠–⁠40. The analogy of this festival to the Babylonian Sacaea was long ago pointed out by J. J. Bachofen. See his book <i>Die Sage von Tanaquil</i> (Heidelberg, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 172 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1019" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1020" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristotle, <i>Hist. anim.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 32, <abbr>p.</abbr> 557<i>b</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bekker; Theophrastus, <i>Hist. Plant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 8; <i>id.</i>, <i>De causis plantarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 9; Plutarch, <i>Quaest. conviv.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 2. 2; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 79⁠–⁠81, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 114, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 256; Palladius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 10. 28, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 5. 2; Columella, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 2. 56; <i>Geoponica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 6, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 48. As to the practice in modern Greece and the fig-growing districts of Asia Minor, see P. de Tournefort, <i>Relation d’un voyage du Levant</i> (Amsterdam, 1718), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 130; W. R. Paton, “The <i>Pharmakoi</i> and the Story of the Fall,” <i>Revue archéologique</i>, IVème Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 51. For an elaborate examination of the process and its relation to the domestication and spread of the fig-tree, see Graf zu Solms-Laubach, “Die Herkunft, Domestication und Verbreitung des gewöhnlichen Feigenbaums (<i>Ficus Carica</i>, L.),” <i>Abhandlungen der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1882) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠106. This last writer thinks that the operation was not practised by Italian husbandmen, because it is not mentioned by Cato and Varro. But their silence can hardly outweigh the express mention and recommendation of it by Palladius and Columella. Theophrastus, it is true, says that the process was not in use in Italy (<i>Hist. Plantarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 8. 1), but he can scarcely have had exact information on this subject. <i>Caprificatio</i>, as this artificial fertilisation of fig-trees is called, is still employed by the Neapolitan peasantry, though it seems to be unknown in northern Italy. Pliny’s account has no independent value, as he merely copies from Theophrastus. The name “goat-fig” (<i>caprificus</i>) applied to the wild fig-tree may be derived from the notion that the tree is a male who mounts the female as the he-goat mounts the she-goat. Similarly the Messenians called the tree simply “he-goat” (τράγος). See Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 20. 1⁠–⁠3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1020" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1021" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Pitrè, <i>Usi e costumi, credenze e pregiudizi del popolo siciliano</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 113.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1021" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1022" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Budgett Meakin, <i>The Moors</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 258; E. Doutté, <i>Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i> (Algiers, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 568.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1022" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1023" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Engler, in <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Hehn’s <i>Kulturpflanzen und Hausthiere</i>, 7th Ed., (Berlin, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 99. Compare Graf zu Solms-Laubach, <i>op. cit.</i>; <i>Encyclopaedia Biblica</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Fig-tree,” <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 1519. The ancients were well aware of the production of these insects in the wild fig-tree and their transference to the cultivated fig-tree. Sometimes instead of fertilising the trees by hand they contented themselves with planting wild fig-trees near cultivated fig-trees, so that the fertilisation was effected by the wind, which blew the insects from the male to the female trees. See Aristotle, <i>l.c.</i>; Theophrastus, <i>De causis plantarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 9; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 79⁠–⁠81; Palladius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 10. 28. On subject of the fertilisation of the fig the late Professor H. Marshall Ward of Cambridge kindly furnished me with the following note, which will serve to supplement and correct the brief account in the text:⁠—“The fig is a hollow case full of flowers. In the wild fig a small gall wasp (<i>Cynips psenes</i>) lays its eggs: this kind of fig is still called <i>Caprificus</i>. The eggs hatch in the female flowers at the base of the hollow fig: at the top, near the ostiole observable on any ripe fig, are the male flowers. When the eggs hatch, and the little insects creep through the ostiole, the male flowers dust the wasp with pollen, and the insect flies to another flower (to lay its eggs), and so fertilises many of the female flowers in return for the nursery afforded its eggs. Now, the cultivated fig is apt to be barren of male flowers. Hence the hanging of branches bearing wild figs enables the escaping wasps to do the trick. The ancients knew the fact that the propinquity of the <i>Caprificus</i> helped the fertility of the cultivated fig, but, of course, they did not know the details of the process. The further complexities are, chiefly, that the fig bears two kinds of female flowers: one especially fitted for the wasp’s convenience, the other not. The <i>Caprificus</i> figs are inedible. In Naples three crops of them are borne every year, <abbr>viz.</abbr> <i>Mamme</i> (in April), <i>Profichi</i> (in June), and <i>Mammoni</i> (in August). It is the June crop that bears most male flowers and is most useful.” The suggestion that the festival of the seventh of July was connected with this horticultural operation is due to L. Preller (<i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 287).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1023" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1024" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_24">24</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1024" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1025" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>1 Kings <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 25; 2 Kings <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 31; Isaiah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. 16; Micah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 4; Zechariah <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 10; Judges <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 10 <i>sq.</i>; H. B. Tristram, <i>The Natural History of the Bible</i> 9th Ed. (London, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 350 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>Encyclopaedia Biblica</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Fig Tree,” <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1519 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1025" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1026" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 71.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1026" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1027" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Zamachschar, cited by Graf zu Solms-Laubach, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 82. For more evidence as to the fig in antiquity see <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Hehn, <i>Kulturpflanzen und Hausthiere</i>, 7th Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1027" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1028" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Letter of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> C. W. Hobley to me, dated Nairobi, British East Africa, July 27th, 1910. This interesting information was given spontaneously and not in answer to any questions of mine.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1028" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1029" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. W. Hobley, <i>The Ethnology of A-Kamba and other East African Tribes</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85, 89 <i>sq.</i> In British Central Africa “every village has its ‘prayer-tree,’ under which the sacrifices are offered. It stands (usually) in the <i>bwalo</i>, the open space which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Macdonald calls the ‘forum,’ and is, sometimes, at any rate, a wild fig-tree.” “This is the principal tree used for making bark-cloth. Livingstone says, ‘It is a sacred tree all over Africa and India’; and I learn from M. Auguste Chevalier that it is found in every village of Senegal and French Guinea, and looked on as ‘a fetich-tree’ ” (Miss A. Werner, <i>The Natives of British Central Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1029" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1030" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the unpublished papers of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Roscoe, which he has kindly placed at my disposal.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1030" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1031" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 54; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 4. 5; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 411 <i>sq.</i>; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 77; Festus, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 266, 270, 271, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Tacitus, <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. 58; Servius on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 90; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 4; <i>id.</i>, <i>Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 57; Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Antiquitates Romanae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 71. 5. All the Roman writers speak of the tree as a cultivated fig (<i>ficus</i>), not a wild fig (<i>caprificus</i>), and Dionysius agrees with them. Plutarch alone (<i>Romulus</i>, 4) describes it as a wild fig-tree (ἐρινεός). See also above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_10">10</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1031" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1032" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Ettore Pais, <i>Ancient Legends of Roman History</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55 <i>sqq.</i> Festus indeed treats the derivation as an absurdity, and many people will be inclined to agree with him.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1032" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1033" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the fifth of July a ceremony called the Flight of the People was performed at Rome. Some ancient writers thought that it commemorated the dispersal of the people after the disappearance of Romulus. But this is to confuse the dates; for, according to tradition, the death of Romulus took place on the seventh, not the fifth of July, and therefore after instead of before the Flight of the People. See Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 18; Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2. 14; Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 56. 5; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 29; <i>id.</i>, <i>Camillus</i>, 33; W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 174 <i>sqq.</i> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Warde Fowler may be right in thinking that some connexion perhaps existed between the ceremonies of the two days, the fifth and the seventh; and I agree with his suggestion that “the story itself of the death of Romulus had grown out of some religious rite performed at this time of year.” I note as a curious coincidence, for it can hardly be more, that at Bodmin in Cornwall a festival was held on the seventh of July, when a Lord of Misrule was appointed, who tried people for imaginary crimes and sentenced them to be ducked in a quagmire called Halgaver, which is explained to mean “the goat’s moor.” See T. F. Thiselton Dyer, <i>British Popular Customs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 339. The “goat’s moor” is an odd echo of the “goat’s marsh” at which Romulus disappeared on the same day of the year (Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 16. 1; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 29; <i>id.</i>, <i>Camillus</i>, 33).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1033" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1034" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 14. 1 <i>sq.</i>; Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 52. 3; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 23.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1034" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1035" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 35; Zonaras, <i>Annales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 6. As to his reported death by lightning, see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_181">181</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1035" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1036" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 22. I have pruned the luxuriant periods in which Plutarch dwells, with edifying unction, on the righteous visitation of God which overtook that early agnostic Tullus Hostilius.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1036" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1037" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aurelius Victor, <i>De viris illustribus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1037" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1038" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 40; Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 73.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1038" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1039" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 48; Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 38 <i>sq.</i>; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 25. The reading <i>Virbium clivum</i> (“the slope of Virbius”) occurs only in the more recent manuscripts of Livy: the better-attested reading both of Livy and Solinus is <i>Urbium</i>. But the obscure <i>Virbium</i> would easily and naturally be altered into <i>Urbium</i>, whereas the reverse change is very improbable. See <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook, in <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 380, note 3. In this passage <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook was the first to call attention to the analogy between the murder of the slave-born king, Servius Tullius, and the slaughter of the slave-king by his successor at Nemi. As to the oak-woods of the Esquiline see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_185">185</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1039" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1040" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nicolaus Damascenus, in Stobaeus, <i>Florilegium</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 70. <i>Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 457.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1040" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1041" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Jordan, <i>Die Könige im alten Italien</i> (Berlin, 1887), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 44 <i>sq.</i> In this his last work Jordan argues that the Umbrian practice, combined with the rule of the Arician priesthood, throws light on the existence and nature of the kingship among the ancient Latins. On this subject I am happy to be at one with so learned and judicious a scholar.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1041" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1042" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. E. Dennett, <i>At the Back of the Black Man’s Mind</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11 <i>sq.</i>, 111, 131 <i>sq.</i>, 135. The word translated “sacred ground” (<i>xibila</i>, plural <i>bibila</i>) means properly “sacred grove.” Such “sacred groves” are common in this part of Africa, but in the “sacred grove” of the king of Loango the tree beside which the monarch takes post to fight for the crown appears to stand solitary in a grassy plain. See R. E. Dennett, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11 <i>sq.</i>, 25, 96 <i>sqq.</i>, 110 <i>sqq.</i> We have seen that the right of succession to the throne of Loango descends in the female line (above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_276">276</a> <i>sq.</i>), which furnishes another point of resemblance between Loango and Rome, if my theory of the Roman kingship is correct.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1042" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1043" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Frazer, <i>Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 530. My authority is the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Roscoe, formerly of the Church Missionary Society in Uganda.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1043" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1044" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Memoirs of Samuel Pepys</i>, edited by Richard, Lord Braybrooke, Second Edition (London, 1828), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 193 <i>sq.</i> (under April 23rd, 1661).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1044" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1045" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, <i>Rerum rusticarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 9 <i>sq.</i> “<i>Romanorum vero populum a pastoribus esse ortum quis non dicit?</i>” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Amongst other arguments in favour of this view Varro refers to the Roman personal names derived from cattle, both large and small, such as <i>Porcius</i>, “pig-man,” <i>Ovinius</i>, “sheep-man,” <i>Caprilius</i>, “goat-man,” <i>Equitius</i>, “horse-man,” <i>Taurius</i>, “bull-man,” and so forth. On the importance of cattle and milk among the ancient Aryans see O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i> (Strasburg, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 541 <i>sq.</i>, 689 <i>sqq.</i>, 913 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1045" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1046" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1046" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1047" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the foundation of Rome on this date see Varro, <i>Rerum rusticarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 9; Cicero, <i>De divinatione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 47. 98; Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Parilibus,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 236, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. 247; Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 4. 73 <i>sq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 801⁠–⁠806; <i>id.</i>, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 774 <i>sq.</i>; Velleius Paterculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 8. 4; Eutropius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 1; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 18; Censorinus, <i>De die natali</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. 6; Probus on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1; Schol. Veronens. on Virgil, <i>l.c.</i>; Dionysius Halicarnas, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 88; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 12; Dio Cassius, xliii. 42; Zonaras, <i>Annales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3; Joannes Lydus, <i>De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 14, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 50. As to the birth of Numa, see Plutarch, <i>Numa</i>, 3. The festival is variously called Parilia and Palilia by ancient writers, but the form Parilia seems to be the better attested of the two. See G. Wissowa, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Pales,” in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griech. und röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1278.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1047" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1048" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius of Halicarnassus (<i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 88) hesitates between these two views. With truer historical insight Plutarch (<i>Romulus</i>, 12) holds that the rustic festival was older than the foundation of Rome.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1048" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1049" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See, for example, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 32.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1049" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1050" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For modern discussions of the Parilia, see L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 413 <i>sqq.</i>; J. Marquardt, <i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 207 <i>sq.</i>; W. Mannhardt, <i>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309⁠–⁠317; W. Warde Fowler, <i>Roman Festivals</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 79⁠–⁠85; G. Wissowa, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Pales,” in W. H. Roscher’s <i>Lexikon der griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1276⁠–⁠1280; <i>id.</i>, <i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1050" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1051" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cicero, <i>De divinatione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 47. 98; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 806; Calendar of Philocalus, quoted by W. Warde Fowler, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 79; Probus on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1; Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 12; Zonaras, <i>Annales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1051" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1052" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1052" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1053" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Pales,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 222, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Dionysius Halic. <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1053" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1054" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1. See also Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 40; Martianus Capella, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 50.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1054" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1055" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 637⁠–⁠640, 731⁠–⁠734; Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 19 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1055" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1056" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_229">229</a>. As to the sacrifice of the horse in October see <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 315 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1056" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1057" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5. 91 <i>sq.</i>:⁠—<br/>
					<div class="c007 lg-container-b"><div class="linegroup"><div class="group"><div class="line">“<i>Et fetus matrona dabit, natusque parenti</i></div> <div class="line"><i>Oscula comprensis auribus cripict.</i>”</div></div></div></div> <a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1057" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1058" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 735⁠–⁠738. In his account of the festival Ovid mentions only shepherds and sheep; but since Pales was a god of cattle as well as of sheep (Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 23), we may suppose that herds and herdsmen equally participated in it. Dionysius (<i>l.c.</i>) speaks of four-footed beasts in general.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1058" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1059" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>So <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Warde Fowler understands Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 735⁠–⁠742.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1059" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1060" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 805 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1060" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1061" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 739 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1061" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1062" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 747 <i>sq.</i>:⁠—</p>
					<div class="c007 lg-container-b">
						<div class="linegroup">
							<div class="group">
								<div class="line">“<i>Consule, dic, pecori pariter pecorisque magistris:</i></div>
								<div class="in2 line"><i>Effugiat stabulis noxa repulsa meis.</i>”</div>
							</div>
						</div>
					</div>
					<p class="c008">With this sense of <i>noxa</i> compare <i>id.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 129 <i>sq.</i>, where it is said that buckthorn or hawthorn “<i>tristes pellere posset a foribus noxas</i>.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1062" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1063" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 763⁠–⁠774. The prayer that the wolves may be kept far from the fold is mentioned also by Tibullus (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5. 88).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1063" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1064" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 779⁠–⁠782; Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5. 89 <i>sq.</i>; Propertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 19, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 4. 77 sq.; Persius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 72; Probus on Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1064" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1065" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>I owe this observation to F. A. Paley, on Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 754. He refers to Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 435, <i>Ecl.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 30; Theocritus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 73 <i>sq.</i>; to which may be added Virgil, <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 300 <i>sq.</i>, 320 <i>sq.</i>; Horace, <i>Epist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 14. 28; Cato, <i>De re rustica</i>, 30; Columella, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3. 21, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. 2. 83 and 99⁠–⁠101. From these passages of Cato and Columella we learn that the Italian farmer fed his cattle on the leaves of the elm, the ash, the poplar, the oak, the evergreen oak, the fig, and the laurel.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1065" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1066" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 749⁠–⁠754.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1066" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1067" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 757⁠–⁠760.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1067" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1068" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Columella, <i>De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3. 11. In this respect the practice of ancient Italian farmers would seem to have differed from that of modern English breeders. In a letter (dated 8th February 1908) my friend Professor W. Somerville of Oxford writes: “It is against all modern custom to arrange matters so that lambs are born five months after April 21, say the end of September.” And, again, in another letter (dated 16th February 1908) he writes to me: “The matter of coupling ewes and rams in the end of April is very perplexing. In this country it is only the Dorset breed of sheep that will ‘take’ the ram at this time of the year. In the case of other breeds the ewe will only take the ram in autumn, say from July to November, so that the lambs are born from January to May. We consider that lambs born late in the season, say May or June, never thrive well.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1068" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1069" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The suggestion was made by C. G. Heyne in his commentary on Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 5. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1069" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1070" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>O. Keller, <i>Thiere des classischen Alterthums</i> (Innsbruck, 1887), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1070" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1071" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Calpurnius, <i>Bucol.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 16⁠–⁠28.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1071" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1072" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i>Romulus</i>, 12.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1072" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1073" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i>Ant. Rom.</i> 1. 88.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1073" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1074" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the view of J. Marquardt (<i>Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 2nd Ed., 207), and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Warde Fowler (<i>Roman Festivals</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 83, note 1).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1074" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1075" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82⁠–⁠84, 116⁠–⁠118; F. J. Wiedemann, <i>Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 332, 356⁠–⁠361; Holzmayer, “Osiliana,” <i>Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1872) <abbr>p.</abbr> 61.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1075" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1076" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. J. Wiedemann, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 413.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1076" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1077" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_75">75</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1077" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1078" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Russian Folk-tales</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 344, 345.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1078" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1079" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229⁠–⁠231. In the island of Rhodes also it is customary for people to roll themselves on the grass for good luck on <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Day. See Mary Hamilton, <i>Greek Saints and their Festivals</i> (Edinburgh and London, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 166.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1079" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1080" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Olga Bartels, “Aus dem Leben der weissrussischen Landbevölkerung,” <i>Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 659.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1080" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1081" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 389. French peasants of the Vosges Mountains believe that <abbr>St.</abbr> George shuts the mouths of wild beasts and prevents them from attacking the flocks which are placed under his protection (L. F. Sauvé, <i>Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 127).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1081" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1082" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 319 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1082" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1083" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. F. Kaindl, “Zauberglaube bei den Rutenen in der Bukowina und Galizien,” <i>Globus</i>, lxi. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 280.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1083" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1084" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. F. Kaindl, <i>Die Huzulen</i> (Vienna, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <i>sq.</i>, 78, 88 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, “Zauberglaube bei den Huzulen,” <i>Globus</i>, lxxvi. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 233.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1084" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1085" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Drechsler, <i>Sitte, Brauch und Volksglaube in Schlesien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipsic, 1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 106 <i>sq.</i> The authority quoted for the sacrifice is Tiede, <i>Merkwürdigkeiten Schlesiens</i> (1804), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 <i>sq.</i> It is not expressly said, but we may assume, that the sacrifice was offered on <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Day.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1085" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1086" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Birlinger, <i>Aus Schwaben</i> (Wiesbaden, 1874), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 166. Compare <i>id.</i>, <i>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 21 n. 1.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1086" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1087" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Meyer, <i>Badisches Volksleben im neunzehnten Jahrhundert</i> (Strasburg, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 219, 408.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1087" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1088" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Haltrich, <i>Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</i> (Vienna, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 281.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1088" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1089" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Schmidt, <i>Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen Siebenbürgens</i> (Hermannstadt, 1866), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9, 11. Compare R. F. Kaindl, “Zur Volkskunde der Rumänen in der Bukowina,” <i>Globus</i>, xcii. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 284. It does not appear whether the shepherd’s pouch (“<i>Hirtentaschen</i>”) in question is the real pouch or the plant of that name.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1089" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1090" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. und A. Schott, <i>Walachische Maehrchen</i> (Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1845), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1090" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1091" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Strausz, <i>Die Bulgaren</i> (Leipsic, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1091" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1092" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Strausz, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 337.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1092" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1093" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 230.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1093" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1094" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_126">126</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1094" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1095" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125⁠–⁠127; <i>id.</i>, <i>Kroatien und Slavonien</i> (Vienna, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 105 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1095" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1096" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. J. A. Tettau und J. D. H. Temme, <i>Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i> (Berlin, 1837), <abbr>p.</abbr> 263.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1096" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1097" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Lloyd, <i>Peasant Life in Sweden</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 246⁠–⁠251; A. Kuhn, <i>Herabkunft des Feuers</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 163 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1097" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1098" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_75">75</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1098" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1099" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. R. S. Ralston, <i>Russian Folk-tales</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 345.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1099" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marie Andree-Eysn, <i>Volkskundliches aus dem bayrisch-österreichischen Alpengebiet</i> (Brunswick, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 180⁠–⁠182.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Meyer, <i>Badisches Volksleben im neunzehnten Jahrhundert</i> (Strasburg, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 423; K. Freiherr von Leoprechting, <i>Aus dem Lechrain</i> (Munich, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 168.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_56">56</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. Strausz, <i>Die Bulgaren</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337, 385 <i>sq.</i> There seems to be a special connexion between <abbr>St.</abbr> George and serpents. In Bohemia and Moravia it is thought that up to the twenty-third of April serpents are innocuous, and only get their poison on the saint’s day. See J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, §§ 326, 580, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 51, 81; W. Müller, <i>Beiträge zur Volkskunde der Deutschen in Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 323. Various other charms are effected by means of serpents on this day. Thus if you tear out the tongue of a live snake on <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Day, put it in a ball of wax, and lay the ball under your tongue, you will be able to talk down anybody. See J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>op. cit.</i>, §§ 576, 1169, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81, 166.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>op. cit.</i> § 1463, <abbr>p.</abbr> 210.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>Sitte und Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 175.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. S. Krauss, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 175 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194 <i>sq.</i>; J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i>op. cit.</i>, § 554, <abbr>p.</abbr> 77.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. J. Curtiss, <i>Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 83 <i>sq.</i>, 118 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Baring-Gould, <i>Curious Myths of the Middle Ages</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278 <i>sqq.</i> The authority for this identification is the nominal translator, but real author, of the work called <i>The Agriculture of the Nabataeans</i>. See D. A. Chwolson, <i>Über Tammuz und die Menschenverehrung bei den alten Babyloniern</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1860), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 56 <i>sq.</i> Although <i>The Agriculture of the Nabataeans</i> appears to be a forgery (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_100">100</a>, note 2), the identification of the oriental <abbr>St.</abbr> George with Tammuz may nevertheless be correct.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Maeletius (Menecius), “De sacrificiis et idolatria veterum Borussorum Livonum aliarumque vicinarum gentium,” <i>Mitteilungen der Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</i>, Heft 8 (Lötzen, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185, 187, 200 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i> in <i>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 389, 390; J. Lasicius, “De diis Samagitarum caeterorumque Sarmatarum,” <abbr>ed.</abbr> W. Mannhardt, in <i>Magazin herausgegeben von der Lettisch-literärischen Gesellschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 95 <i>sq.</i> The first form of the prayer to Pergrubius is from the Latin, the second from the German, version of Maeletius’s (Jan Malecki’s) work. The description of Pergrubius as “he who makes leaves and grass to grow” (“<i>der lest wachssen laub unnd gras</i>”) is also from the German. According to M. Praetorius, Pergrubius was a god of husbandry (<i>Deliciae Prussicae</i>, Berlin, 1871, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_7">7</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Geikie, <i>Prehistoric Europe</i> (Edinburgh, 1881), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 420 <i>sq.</i>, 482 <i>sqq.</i>, 495.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Munro, <i>Ancient Scottish Lake Dwellings or Crannogs</i> (Edinburgh, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 266, quoting Alton’s <i>Treatise on the Origin, Qualities, and Cultivation of Moss Earth</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Geikie, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 432⁠–⁠436.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Geikie, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 461⁠–⁠463.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. von Humboldt, <i>Kosmos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1845) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298. The passage is mistranslated in the English version edited by E. Sabine.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Charles Lyell, <i>The Geological Evidence of the Antiquity of Man</i> 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, (London, 1873), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8, 17, 415 <i>sq.</i>; Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury), <i>Prehistoric Times</i> 5th Ed., (London, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 251, 387; J. Geikie, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 485⁠–⁠487.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Geikie, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 487 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Geikie, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 489.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Munro, <i>Ancient Scottish Lake Dwellings</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 20, quoting the article “Crannoges” in <i>Chambers’s Encyclopædia</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>R. Munro, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 23. For more evidence of the use of oak in British crannogs, see <i>id.</i>, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6⁠–⁠8, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33 <i>sq.</i>, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 51 <i>sq.</i>, 53, 61, 62, 97, 122, 208, 262, 291⁠–⁠299; <i>id.</i> <i>The Lake Dwellings of Europe</i> (London, Paris, and Melbourne, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 350, 364, 372, 377.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Keller, <i>The Lake Dwellings of Switzerland and other Parts of Europe</i> 2nd Ed., (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 37, 48, 65, 87, 93, 105, 110, 129, 156, 186, 194, 201, 214, 264, 268, 289, 300, 320, 375, 382, 434, 438, 440, 444, 446, 465, 639.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. Keller, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 332, 334, 375, 586.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>W. Helbig, <i>Die Italiker in der Poebene</i> (Leipsic, 1879), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12, 16 <i>sq.</i>, 26. The bones of cattle, pigs, goats, and sheep prove that these animals were bred by the people of the Italian pile villages. See W. Helbig, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 14.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 4. 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 195.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 6 “<i>Hercyniae silvae roborum vastitas⁠ ⁠… glandiferi maxime generis omnes, quibus honos apud Romanos perpetuus.</i>”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Hirt, “Die Urheimat der Indogermanen,” <i>Indogermanische Forschungen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 480; P. Kretschmer, <i>Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</i> (Göttingen, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 81; O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der Indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Eiche,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 164. This etymology assumes that <i>Hercynia</i> represents an original <i>Perkunia</i>, and is connected with the Latin <i>quercus</i>. However, the derivation is not undisputed. See O. Schrader, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1015 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 15. Compare Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 1. 12, <abbr>p.</abbr> 218.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 3. 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 228.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 84.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 23. 8 <i>sq.</i> For notices of forests and groves of oak in Arcadia and other parts of Greece, see <i>id.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 11. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 10. 6, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 26. 10, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 11. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 25. 1, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 42. 12, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 54. 5, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 3. 4, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 24. 5. The oaks in the Arcadian forests were of various species (<i>id.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 12. 1).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <i>Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</i> (Breslau, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 378.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Encyclopædia Britannica</i>, 9th Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 690.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Georg.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7 <i>sq.</i>, 147⁠–⁠149; Lucretius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 939 <i>sq.</i>, 965; Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 1. 37 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 3. 69; Ovid, <i>Metam.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 106; <i>id.</i>, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 675 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 399⁠–⁠402; Juvenal, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. 182⁠–⁠184; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 6. 12; Dionysius Halicarnas. <i>Ars rhetorica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 6, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 230, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Reiske; Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 234; Poryphry, <i>De abstinentia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hesiod, <i>Works and Days</i>, 232 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 66.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 1, 6. According to Pausanias it was only the acorns of the <i>phegos</i> oak which the Arcadians ate.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 15.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 3. 7, <abbr>p.</abbr> 155.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Neumann und J. Partsch, <i>Physikalische Geographie von Griechenland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 379.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Neumann and J. Partsch, <i>op. cit.</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 382, note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cervantes, <i>Don Quixote</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. ch. 50, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 133 of H. E. Watts’s translation, with the translator’s note (new edition, London, 1895); Neumann und Partsch, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 380; P. Wagler, <i>Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Wurzen, 1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 35. The passage in <i>Don Quixote</i> was pointed out to me by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Wyse.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Encyclopædia Britannica</i>, 9th. Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. 692.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. E. Watts, <i>loc. cit.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Encyclopædia Britannica</i>, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>To avoid misapprehension, I desire to point out that I am not here concerned with the evolution of Aryan religion in general, but only with that of a small, though important part of it, to wit, the worship of a particular kind of tree. To write a general history of Aryan religion in all its many aspects as a worship of nature, of the dead, and so forth, would be a task equally beyond my powers and my ambition. Still less should I dream of writing a universal history of religion. The “general work” referred to in the preface to the first edition of <i>The Golden Bough</i> is a book of far humbler scope.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples of such ceremonies, see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_18">18</a>−20, <a href="#Page_34">34</a>−38.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For evidence of these aspects of Zeus and Jupiter, see L. Preller, <i>Griechische Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, 115 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 184 <i>sqq.</i> In former editions of this book I was disposed to set aside much too summarily what may be called the meteorological side of Zeus and Jupiter.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 17. 5; P. Wagler, <i>Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 2 <i>sqq.</i>; A. B. Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 178 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Aug.</abbr> Mommsen, <i>Delphika</i> (Leipsic, 1878), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, Frag. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 3; Stephanus Byzantius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Δωδώνη; Suidas, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">vv</span>.</i> Δωδωναῖον χαλκεῖον and Δωδώνη; Apostolius, <i>Cent.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 43; Zenobius, <i>Cent.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 5; Nonnus Abbas, <i>Ad S. Gregorii orat. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. contra Julianum</i>, 19 (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Graeca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. 1045). The evidence on this subject has been collected and discussed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook (“The Gong at Dodona,” <i>Journal of Hellenic Studies</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5⁠–⁠28). The theory in the text is obviously consistent, both with the statement that the sound of the gongs was consulted as oracular, and with the view, advocated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook, that it was supposed to avert evil influences from the sanctuary. If I am right, the bronze statuette which, according to some accounts, produced the sound by striking the gong with a clapper would represent Zeus himself making his thunder.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the natural surroundings of Dodona, see C. Carapanos, <i>Dodone et ses ruines</i> (Paris, 1878), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 7⁠–⁠10.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_140">140</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 309. On the oak as the tree of Zeus, see Dionysius Halicarn. <i>Ars rhetorica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 6, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 230 <abbr>ed.</abbr> Reiske; Schol. on Aristophanes, <i>Birds</i>, 480. On this subject much evidence, both literary and monumental, has been collected by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook in his articles “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 174 <i>sqq.</i>, 268 <i>sqq.</i>, 403 <i>sqq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <i>sqq.</i>, 327 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 24. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marcus Antoninus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 7.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>De signis tempestatum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 24.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 30. 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 29. 7 <i>sq.</i>; Isocrates, <i>Evagoras</i>, 14; Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 12. 6. Aeacus was said to be the son of Zeus by Aegina, daughter of Asopus (Apollodorus, <i>l.c.</i>). Isocrates says that his relationship to the god marked Aeacus out as the man to procure rain.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>De signis tempestatum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 20, compare 24.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 43.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 32. 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophrastus, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 43 and 47. Compare Aristophanes, <i>Clouds</i>, 324 <i>sq.</i>; Photius, <i>Lexicon</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> Πάρνης.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 32. 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 25. 10. As to the climate and scenery of these barren mountains, see A. Philippson, <i>Der Peloponnes</i> (Berlin, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 43 <i>sq.</i>, 65.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joannes Lydus, <i>De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 48.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paton and Hicks, <i>The Inscriptions of Cos</i> (Oxford, 1891), <abbr>No.</abbr> 382; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>No.</abbr> 735. There were altars of Rainy Zeus also at Argos and Lebadea. See Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 19. 8, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 39. 4.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ἐπικάρπιος μὲν ἀπὸ τῶν καρπῶν, Aristotle, <i>De mundo</i>, 7, <abbr>p.</abbr> 401 a, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bekker; Plutarch, <i>De Stoicorum repugnantiis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. 8.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Atticarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 77; E. S. Roberts, <i>Introduction to Greek Epigraphy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 142, <abbr>p.</abbr> 387; Ch. Michel, <i>Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 692; L. R. Farnell, <i>Cults of the Greek States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 66 and 172.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hesiod, <i>Theogony</i>, 71 <i>sq.</i>; L. Preller, <i>Griechische Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 119.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 14. 7; H. Roehl, <i>Inscriptiones Graecae antiquissimae</i> (Berlin, 1882), <abbr>No.</abbr> 101; Fränkel, <i>Inschriften von Pergamon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 232; Joannes Malalas, <i>Chronographia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 199, <abbr>ed.</abbr> L. Dindorf.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 2. 11, <abbr>p.</abbr> 404.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. 41; Hesychius, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> ἠλύσιον; <i>Etymologicum Magnum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 341. 8 <i>sqq.</i>; Artemidorus, <i>Onirocrit.</i> 11. 9; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 14. 10; Dittenberger, <i>Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>, 2nd Ed., <abbr>No.</abbr> 577, with Dittenberger’s note.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_177">177</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For more evidence that the old Greek kings regularly personified Zeus, see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook, “The European Sky-god,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil. <i>Georg.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 332, with Servius’s note; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to the oak of Jupiter on the Capitol and the god’s oak crown, see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_176">176</a>. With regard to the Capitoline worship of Thundering Jupiter, see Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 21, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. 10 and 79, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. 50. He was worshipped in many places besides Rome as the god of thunder and lightning. See Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 229, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Apuleius, <i>De mundo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. 371; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptones Latinae selectae</i>, Nos. 3044⁠–⁠3053.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Petronius, <i>Sat.</i> 44. That the slope mentioned by Petronius was the Capitoline one is made highly probable by a passage of Tertullian (<i>Apologeticus</i> 40: “<i>Aquilicia Jovi immolatis, nudipedalia populo denuntiatis, coelum apud Capitolium quaeritis, nubila de laquearibus exspectatis</i>”). The church father’s scorn for the ceremony contrasts with the respect, perhaps the mock respect, testified for it by the man in Petronius. The epithets Rainy and Showery are occasionally applied to Jupiter. See Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7. 26; Apuleius, <i>De mundo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. 371; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 3043.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. Dessau, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 3042; Apuleius, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apuleius, <i>l.c.</i>, “<i>Plures eum Frugiferum vocant</i>”; H. Dessau, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>No.</abbr> 3017.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On this subject see H. Munro Chadwick, “The Oak and the Thunder-god,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 22⁠–⁠42.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 249.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maximus Tyrius, <i>Dissert.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 8. H. D’Arbois de Jubainville supposed that by Celts the writer here meant Germans (<i>Cours de la littérature celtique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 121 <i>sqq.</i>). This was not the view of J. Grimm, to whose authority D’Arbois de Jubainville appealed. Grimm says that what Maximus Tyrius affirms of the Celts might be applied to the Germans (<i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 55), which is quite a different thing.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 5. 1, <abbr>p.</abbr> 567. As to the meaning of the name see (Sir) J. Rhys, <i>Celtic Heathendom</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 221; H. F. Tozer, <i>Selections from Strabo</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 284. On the Galatian language see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_126">126</a>, note 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Curtius, <i>Griech. Etymologie</i>, 5th Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 238 <i>sq.</i>; J. Rhys, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 221 <i>sq.</i>; P. Kretschmer, <i>Einleitung in die Geschichte der griech. Sprache</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 81. Compare A. Vanicek, <i>Griechisch-lateinisch. etymologisches Wörterbuch</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 368⁠–⁠370. Oak in old Irish is <i>daur</i>, in modern Irish <i>dair</i>, <i>darach</i>, in Gaelic <i>darach</i>. See G. Curtius, <i>l.c.</i>; A. Macbain, <i>Etymological Dictionary of the Gaelic Language</i> (Inverness, 1896), <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Darach.” On this view Pliny was substantially right (<i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 249) in connecting Druid with the Greek <i>drus</i>, “oak,” though the name was not derived from the Greek. However, this derivation of Druid has been doubted or rejected by some scholars. See H. D’Arbois de Jubainville, <i>Cours de la littérature celtique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <i>sqq.</i>; O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 638 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_242">242</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Gael’s “faith in druidism was never suddenly undermined; for in the saints he only saw more powerful druids than those he had previously known, and Christ took the position in his eyes of the druid κατ’ ἐξοχήν. Irish druidism absorbed a certain amount of Christianity; and it would be a problem of considerable difficulty to fix on the point where it ceased to be druidism, and from which onwards it could be said to be Christianity in any restricted sense of that term” (J. Rhys, <i>Celtic Heathendom</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 224).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. W. Joyce, <i>Social History of Ancient Ireland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 236.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 55 <i>sq.</i> Tacitus often mentions the sacred groves of the Germans, but never specifies the kinds of trees of which they were composed. See <i>Annals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 12, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 73; <i>Histor.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 14; <i>Germania</i>, 7, 9, 39, 40, 43.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 542.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Willibald’s <i>Life of S. Boniface</i>, in Pertz’s <i>Monumenta Germaniae historica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 343 <i>sq.</i>; J. Grimm, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58, 142.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 157. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> E. Maass supposes that the identification of Donar or Thunar with Jupiter was first made in Upper Germany between the Vosges mountains and the Black Forest. See his work <i>Die Tagesgötter</i> (Berlin, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 280.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adam of Bremen, <i>Descriptio insularum Aquilonis</i>, 26 (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Latina</i>, cxlvi. col. 643).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adam of Bremen, <i>l.c.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. H. Meyer, <i>Mythologie des Germanen</i> (Strasburg, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 290.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Adam of Bremen, <i>op. cit.</i> 26, 27, with the Scholia (Migne’s <i>Patrologia Latina</i>, cxlvi. coll. 642⁠–⁠644).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 142 <i>sq.</i>; L. Leger, <i>La Mythologie slave</i> (Paris, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 54⁠–⁠76.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Leger, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 57 <i>sq.</i>, translating Guagnini’s <i>Sarmatiae Europaeae descriptio</i> (1578). The passage is quoted in the original by Chr. Hartknoch (<i>Alt- und neues Preussen</i>, Frankfort and Leipsic, 1684, <abbr>p.</abbr> 132), who rightly assigns the work to Strykowski, not Guagnini. See W. Mannhardt, in <i>Magazin herausgegeben von der Lettisch-Literarischen Gesellschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 105 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Procopius, <i>De bello Gothico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 14 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 357, <abbr>ed.</abbr> J. Haury).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Matthias Michov, “De Sarmatia Asiana atque Europea,” in Simon Grynaeus’s <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i> (Paris, 1532), <abbr>p.</abbr> 457; <i>id.</i>, in J. Pistorius’s <i>Polonicae historiae corpus</i> (Bâle, 1582), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 144; Martin Cromer, <i>De origine et rebus gestis Polonorum</i> (Bâle, 1568), <abbr>p.</abbr> 241; J. Maeletius (Menecius, Ian Malecki), “De sacrificiis et idolatria veterum Borussorum, Livonum, aliarumque vicinarum gentium,” <i>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Riga and Leipsic, 1848) <abbr>p.</abbr> 390; <i>id.</i>, in <i>Mitteilungen der Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</i>, Heft 8 (Lötzen, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 187; Chr. Hartknoch, <i>Alt- und neues Preussen</i> (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1684), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131 <i>sqq.</i>; S. Rostowski, quoted by A. Brückner, <i>Archiv für slavische Philologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32, 35; M. Töppen, <i>Geschichte der preussischen Historiographie</i> (Berlin, 1853), <abbr>p.</abbr> 190 (“<i>Perkunos ist in allen andern Ueberlieferungen so gross und hehr, wie nur immer der griechische und römische Donnergott, und kein anderer der Götter darf sich ihm gleich stellen. Er ist der Hauptgott, wie nach andern Berichten in Preussen, so auch in Litthauen und Livland</i>”); Schleicher, “Lituanica,” <i>Sitzungsberichte der philosoph.-histor. Classe d. kais. Akademie d. Wissen.</i> (Vienna), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1853 pub. 1854) <abbr>p.</abbr> 96; H. Usener, <i>Götternamen</i> (Bonn, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 97.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Praetorius, <i>Deliciae Prussicae</i> (Berlin, 1871), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19 <i>sq.</i>; S. Rostowski, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 34, 35. On the sacred oaks of the Lithuanians see Chr. Hartknoch, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <i>sqq.</i>; Tettau und Temme, <i>Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19⁠–⁠22, 35⁠–⁠38.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Praetorius, <i>l.c.</i>; S. Grunau, <i>Preussische Chronik</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> M. Perlbach, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipsic, 1876) <abbr>p.</abbr> 78 (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. tract. cap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. § 2). The chronicler, Simon Grunau, lived as an itinerant Dominican friar at the beginning of the sixteenth century in the part of Prussia which had been ceded to Poland. He brought his history, composed in somewhat rustic German, down to 1529. His familiar intercourse with the lowest classes of the people enabled him to learn much as to their old heathen customs and superstitions; but his good faith has been doubted or denied. In particular, his description of the images of the three gods in the great oak at Romove has been regarded with suspicion or denounced as a figment. See Chr. Hartknoch, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 127 <i>sqq.</i>; M. Toeppen, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 122 <i>sqq.</i>, 190 <i>sqq.</i>; M. Perlbach’s preface to his edition of Grunau; H. Usener, <i>Götternamen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 83. But his account of the sanctity of the oak, and of the perpetual sacred fire of oak-wood, may be accepted, since it is confirmed by other authorities. Thus, according to Malecki, a perpetual fire was kept up by a priest in honour of Perkunas (Pargnus) on the top of a mountain, which stood beside the river Neuuassa (Niewiaza, a tributary of the Niemen). See Malecki (Maeletius, Menecius), <i>op. cit.</i>, <i>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 391; <i>id.</i>, <i>Mitteilungen der Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</i>, Heft 8 (Lötzen, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 187. Again, the Jesuit S. Rostowski says that the Lithuanians maintained a perpetual sacred fire in honour of Perkunas in the woods (quoted by A. Brückner, <i>Archiv für slavische Philologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 33). Malecki and Rostowski do not mention that the fire was kindled with oak-wood, but this is expressly stated by M. Praetorius, and is, besides, intrinsically probable, since the oak was sacred to Perkunas. Moreover, the early historian, Peter of Dusburg, who dedicated his chronicle of Prussia to the Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights in 1326, informs us that the high-priest of the nation, whom the Prussians revered as a pope, kept up a perpetual fire at Romow, which is doubtless the same with the Romowo or Romewo of Grunau (<i>Preussische Chronik</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 80, 81, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 62, <abbr>ed.</abbr> M. Perlbach). See P. de Dusburg, <i>Chronicon Prussiae</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Chr. Hartknoch (Frankfort and Leipsic, 1679), <abbr>p.</abbr> 79. Martin Cromer says that the Lithuanians “worshipped fire as a god, and kept it perpetually burning in the more frequented places and towns” (<i>De origine et rebus gestis Polonorum</i>, Bâle, 1568, <abbr>p.</abbr> 241). Romow or Romowo is more commonly known as Romove. Its site is very uncertain. See Chr. Hartknoch, <i>Alt- und neues Preussen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 122 <i>sqq.</i> Grunau’s account of Romove and its sacred oak, with the images of the three gods in it and the fire of oak-wood burning before it, is substantially repeated by Alex. Guagnini. See J. Pistorius, <i>Polonicae historiae corpus</i> (Bâle, 1582), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 52; <i>Respublica sive status regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae, Livoniae</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (Leyden, 1627), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 321 <i>sq.</i> I do not know whether the chronicler, Simon Grunau, is the same with Simon Grynaeus, editor of the <i>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</i>, which was published at Paris in 1532.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. Rostowski, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 35.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>D. Fabricius, “De cultu, religione et moribus incolarum Livoniae,” <i>Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 441. Malecki (Maeletius) also says that Perkunas was prayed to for rain. See <i>Mitteilungen der Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</i>, Heft 8 (Lötzen, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>According to <abbr>Prof.</abbr> H. Hirt, the name Perkunas means “the oak-god,” being derived from the same root <i>querq</i>, which appears in the Latin <i>quercus</i> “oak,” the <i>Hercynian</i> forest, the Norse god and goddess <i>Fjörygn</i>, and the Indian <i>Parjanya</i>, the Vedic god of thunder and rain. See H. Hirt, “Die Urheimat der Indogermanen,” <i>Indogermanische Forschungen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 479 <i>sqq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Die Indogermanen</i> (Strasburg, 1905⁠–⁠1907), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 507; P. Kretschmer, <i>Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81 <i>sq.</i> The identity of the names Perkunas and Parjanya had been maintained long before by G. Bühler, though he did not connect the words with <i>quercus</i>. See his article, “On the Hindu god Parjanya,” <i>Transactions of the (London) Philological Society</i>, 1859, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154⁠–⁠168. As to Parjanya, see below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_368">368</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kreutzwald und H. Neus, <i>Mythische und magische Lieder der Ehsten</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1854), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16, 26, 27, 56, 57, 104; F. J. Wiedemann, <i>Aus dem inneren und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 427, 438. Sometimes, however, a special thunder-god Kou, Koo, Piker or Pikne is distinguished from Taara (Tar). See F. J. Wiedemann, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 427; Kreutzwald und Neus, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i>Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 2.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 146.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>F. J. Wiedemann, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 427.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_367">367</a>, note 3.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Rigveda</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Hymn 83, R. T. H. Griffith’s translation (Benares, 1889⁠–⁠1892), <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Rigveda</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. Hymn 101, Griffith’s translation (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 <i>sq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Rigveda</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. Hymn 102, Griffith’s translation (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 124). On Parjanya see further G. Bühler, “On the Hindu god <i>Parjanya</i>,” <i>Transactions of the (London) Philological Society</i>, 1859, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154⁠–⁠168; <i>id.</i> in <i>Orient und Occident</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1862) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 214⁠–⁠229; J. Muir, <i>Original Sanscrit Texts</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 140⁠–⁠142; H. Oldenberg, <i>Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 226; A. Macdonnell, <i>Vedic Mythology</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 83⁠–⁠85.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Bühler, <i>op. cit.</i> <abbr>p.</abbr> 161.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. H. Morgan, <i>League of the Iroquois</i> (Rochester, 1851), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Spieth, <i>Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 424⁠–⁠427.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. J. Payne, <i>History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Oxford, 1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 407 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>N. Seidlitz, “Die Abchasen,” <i>Globus</i>, lxvi. (1894) <abbr>p.</abbr> 73.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Wagler, <i>Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Berlin, 1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 59.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>P. Wagler, <i>Die Eiche in alter und neuer Zeit</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Wurzen, 1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21⁠–⁠23. For many more survivals of oak-worship in Germany see P. Wagler, <i>op. cit.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 40 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Praetorius, <i>Deliciae Prussicae</i> (Berlin, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 16.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. G. Kohl, <i>Die deutsch-russischen Ostseeprovinzen</i> (Dresden and Leipsic, 1841), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 31; compare 33.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Schleicher, “Lituanica,” <i>Sitzungsberichte der philos.-histor. Classe der kais. Akademie der Wissenschaften</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1853, pub. 1854) <abbr>p.</abbr> 100.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Piggul, steward of the estate of Panikovitz, in a report to Baron de Bogouschefsky, <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1874) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 274 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The evidence will be given later on, when we come to deal with the fire-festivals of Europe. Meantime I may refer the reader to <i>The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 347 <i>sqq.</i>, where, however, the statement as to the universal use of oak-wood in kindling the need-fire is too absolute, exceptions having since come to my knowledge. These will be noticed in the third edition of that part of <i>The Golden Bough</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_186">186</a>, <a href="#Page_365">365</a>, <a href="#Page_366">366</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The only positive evidence, so far as I know, that the Celtic oak-god was also a deity of thunder and rain is his identification with Zeus (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_362">362</a>). But the analogy of the Greeks, Italians, Teutons, Slavs, and Lithuanians may be allowed to supply the lack of more definite testimony.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>It is said to have been observed that lightning strikes an oak twenty times for once that it strikes a beech (J. Grimm, <i>Deutsche Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 64). But even if this observation were correct, we could not estimate its worth unless we knew the comparative frequency of oaks and beeches in the country where it was made. The Greeks observed that a certain species of oak, which they called <i>haliphloios</i>, or sea-bark, was often struck by lightning though it did not grow to a great height; but far from regarding it as thereby marked out for the service of the god they abstained from using its wood in the sacrificial rites. See Theophrastus, <i>Histor. plant.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 8. 5; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. 24.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>M. Abeghian, <i>Der armenische Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 90.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. B. Tylor, <i>Early History of Mankind</i>, 3rd Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 223⁠–⁠227. For more evidence of this wide-spread belief see M. Baudrouin et L. Bonnemère, “Les Haches polies dans l’histoire jusqu’au XIXe siècle,” <i>Bulletins et Mémoires de la Société d’Anthropologie de Paris</i>, Ve Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 496⁠–⁠548; <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Boyd Alexander, “From the Niger, by Lake Chad, to the Nile,” <i>The Geographical Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 144 <i>sq.</i>; A. B. Ellis, <i>Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37 <i>sq.</i>; H. Seidel, “Der Yew’e Dienst im Togolande,” <i>Zeitschrift für afrikanische und oceanischen Sprachen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 161; H. Klose, <i>Togo unter deutscher Flagge</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 197 <i>sq.</i>; L. Conradt, “Die Ngumbu in Südkamerun,” <i>Globus</i>, lxxxi. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 353; Guerlach, “Mœurs et superstitions des sauvages Ba-hnars,” <i>Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 442, 454; J. A. Jacobsen, <i>Reisen in die Inselwelt des Banda-Meeres</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49 <i>sq.</i>, 232; C. Ribbe, “Die Aru-Inseln,” <i>Festschrift des Vereins für Erdkunde zu Dresden</i> (Dresden, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 165; E. Thurston, <i>Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 351; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> P. O. Bodding, “Ancient Stone Implements in the Santal Parganas,” <i>Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, lxx. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17⁠–⁠20; E. M. Gordon, <i>Indian Folk-tales</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 75; <i>County Folk-lore, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Orkney and Shetland Islands</i>, collected by G. F. Black (London, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 153; P. Hermann, <i>Nordische Mythologie</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 339 <i>sq.</i>, 352; M. Toeppen, <i>Aberglauben aus Masuren</i> 2nd Ed., (Danzig, 1867), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 42 <i>sq.</i> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> E. B. Tylor has pointed out how natural to the primitive mind is the association of spark-producing stones with lightning (<i>Primitive Culture</i>, 2nd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 262).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>L. Preller, <i>Griechische Mythologie</i>, 4th <abbr>ed.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 116 <i>sq.</i>; <i>id.</i>, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 184 <i>sqq.</i> As to Jupiter see in particular Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 19, “<i>Coelum enim esse Jovem innumerabiliter et diligenter affirmant</i>”; and Ennius, quoted by Cicero, <i>De natura deorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 25, 65, “<i>Aspice hoc sublimen candens, quem invocant omnes Jovem</i>.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6 <i>sq.</i>, 12; <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_124">124</a> <i>sq.</i>, <a href="#Page_128">128</a> <i>sq.</i>, <a href="#Page_171">171</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 19 <i>sqq.</i>, 40 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_365">365</a>, <a href="#Page_366">366</a>, <a href="#Page_372">372</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_186">186</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 13 <i>sq.</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_184">184</a>, <a href="#Page_266">266</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 205 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_178">178</a> <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This suggestion is due to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook. See his articles, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363 <i>sq.</i>; and “The European Sky-God,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 277 <i>sq.</i> On the other hand see above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_1">1</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virbius may perhaps be etymologically connected with <i>viridis</i>, “green,” and <i>verbena</i>, “a sacred bough.” If this were so, Virbius would be “the Green One.” We are reminded of those popular personifications of the spring, Green George and Jack in the Green. See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_75">75</a> <i>sq.</i>, <a href="#Page_82">82</a> <i>sq.</i> As to the proposed derivation from a root meaning “green” Professor R. S. Conway writes to me (10th January 1903): “From this meaning of the root a derivative in <i>-bus</i> would not strike me as so strange; <i>vir-bho</i> might conceivably mean ‘growing green.’ ” In my <i>Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship</i> (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 282 <i>sq.</i>) I followed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook in interpreting a passage of Plautus (<i>Casina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 5. 23⁠–⁠29) as a reference to the priests of Nemi in the character of mortal Jupiters. But a simpler and more probable explanation of the passage has been given by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> L. R. Farnell. See A. B. Cook, “The European Sky-god,” <i>Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 322 <i>sqq.</i>; L. R. Farnell, in <i>The Hibbert Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 932.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 13, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_378">378</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_171">171</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Horace, <i>Odes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 21. 5 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 23. 9 <i>sq.</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 4. 5 <i>sq.</i>, <i>Carmen Saeculare</i>, 69; Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 25. 6⁠–⁠8; E. H. Bunbury, in Smith’s <i>Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography</i>, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Algidus.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Tifata,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 366, <abbr>ed.</abbr> C. O. Müller; Velleius Paterculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 25. 4; E. H. Bunbury, <i>op. cit.</i> <i>s.<span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.</i> “Tifata.” For more evidence of the association of Diana with the oak, see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 369 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <i>sq.</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_172">172</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The original root appears plainly in <i>Diovis</i> and <i>Diespiter</i>, the older forms of <i>Jupiter</i> (Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 66; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 12). The form Dianus is attested by an inscription found at Aquileia (<i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 783), and the form Jana by Varro (<i>Rerum rusticarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 37. 3) and Macrobius (<i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 8). In <i>Zeus</i>, <i>Dione</i>, <i>Jupiter</i>, and <i>Juno</i> the old root <i>DI</i> appears in the expanded form <i>DIV</i>. As to the etymology of these names, see Ch. Ploix, “Les Dieux qui proviennent de la racine <i>DIV</i>,” <i>Mémoires de la Société de Linguistique de Paris</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1868) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 213⁠–⁠222; G. Curtius, <i>Grundzüge der griechischen Etymologie</i>, 5th Ed., <abbr>pp.</abbr> 236 <i>sq.</i>, 616 <i>sq.</i>; A. Vanicek, <i>Griechisch-lateinisches etymologisches Wörterbuch</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 353 <i>sqq.</i>; W. H. Roscher, <i>Lexikon der griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 45 <i>sq.</i>, 578 <i>sq.</i>, 619; S. Linde, <i>De Jano summo Romanorumdeo</i> (Lund, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 7 <i>sq.</i>; J. S. Speijer, “Le Dieu romain Janus,” <i>Revue de l’Histoire des Religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 37⁠–⁠41; H. Usener, <i>Götternamen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16, 35 <i>sq.</i>, 326; P. Kretschmer, <i>Einleitung in die Geschichte der griechischen Sprache</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 78 <i>sqq.</i>, 91, 161 <i>sq.</i> <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Speijer and Kretschmer reject the derivation of Janus from the root <i>DI</i>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to Juno in these aspects, see L. Preller, <i>Römische Mythologie</i>, 3rd Ed., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 271 <i>sqq.</i>; G. Wissowa, <i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <i>sqq.</i>; W. H. Roscher, <i>Lexikon der griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 578 <i>sqq.</i> As to Diana, see above, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 12, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a href="#Page_124">124</a>, <a href="#Page_128">128</a> <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 89 <i>sqq.</i>; Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9; Servius, on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 610; Joannes Lydus, <i>De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 1 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varro, quoted by Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 28; Joannes Lydus, <i>De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 2. Compare Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 11. See R. Agahd, <i>M. Terentii Varronis rerum divinarum libri I. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>.</i> (Leipsic, 1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <i>sqq.</i>, 203 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 15, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 15. 19; Servius, on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 610; Joannes Lydus, <i>De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 1. <abbr>Prof.</abbr> G. Wissowa thinks that sacrifices were offered to Janus as well as to Juno on the first of every month (<i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91 <i>sq.</i>); but this view does not seem to me to be supported by the evidence of Macrobius (<i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 16, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 15. 18 <i>sq.</i>), to which he refers. Macrobius does not say that the first of every month was sacred to Janus.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 29.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. 138 <i>sqq.</i>; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 585 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Cato, <i>De agri cultura</i>, 134; Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 357; Horace, <i>Epist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 16. 59, compare <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 6. 20; Pliny, <i>Nat. Hist.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. 28; Juvenal, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. 394; Martial, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. 28. 6 <i>sq.</i>; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 12. 5; Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 29; H. Dessau, <i>Inscriptiones Latinae selectae</i>, Nos. 3320, 3322, 3323, 3324, 3325, 5047; G. Henzen, <i>Acta fratrum Arvalium</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 144; Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 46, <abbr>p.</abbr> 692 <span class="fss">D</span>, <span class="fss">E</span>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Augustine, <i>De civitate Dei</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 9 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 783.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 7. 19; Servius, on Virgil, <i>Aen.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. 319 and 357; Arnobius, <i>Adversus nationes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 29; Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. 46, <abbr>p.</abbr> 692 <span class="fss">D</span>. As to the oak-woods of the Janiculum, see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a href="#Page_186">186</a>.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As dialectal differences in the ancient Italian languages seem to have created a multiplicity of deities, so in the Malay language they appear to have created a multiplicity of fabulous animals. See R. J. Wilkinson, <i>Malay Beliefs</i> (London and Leyden, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 56: “The wealth of Malay nomenclature in the province of natural history is in itself a fruitful source of error. The identity of different dialectic names for the same animal is not always recognized: the local name is taken to represent the real animal, the foreign name is assumed to represent a rare or fabulous variety of the same genus.” In these cases mythology might fairly enough be described as a disease of language. But such cases cover only a small part of the vast mythical field.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook, who accepts in substance my theory of the original identity of Jupiter and Janus, Juno and Diana, has suggested that Janus and Diana were the deities of the aborigines of Rome, Jupiter and Juno the deities of their conquerors. See his article, “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 367 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is the opinion of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> W. H. Roscher (<i>Lexikon der griech. u. röm. Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 47), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> W. Warde Fowler (<i>Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 282 <i>sqq.</i>), and <abbr>Prof.</abbr> G. Wissowa (<i>Religion und Kultus der Römer</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 96). It is rejected for the reasons given in the text by Ph. Buttmann (<i>Mythologus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72, 79) and S. Linde (<i>De Jano summo Romanorum deo</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50 <i>sqq.</i>).<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>He was so saluted in the ancient hymns of the Salii. See Macrobius, <i>Sat.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 14; compare Varro, <i>De lingua Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. 26 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. Curtius, <i>Grundzüge der griechischen Etymologie</i>, 5th Ed.,, <abbr>p.</abbr> 258; O. Schrader, <i>Reallexikon der indogermanischen Altertumskunde</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 866.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This theory of the derivation of <i>janua</i> from <i>Janus</i> was suggested, though not accepted, by Ph. Butmann (<i>Mythologus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. 79 <i>sqq.</i>). It occurred to me independently. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. B. Cook also derives <i>janua</i> from <i>Janus</i>, but he would explain the derivation in a different way by supposing that the lintel and two side-posts of a door represented a triple Janus. See his article “Zeus, Jupiter, and the Oak,” <i>Classical Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 369.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>K. Martin, “Bericht über eine Reise ins Gebiet des Oberen-Surinam,” <i>Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28 <i>sq.</i> I am indebted to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> A. van Gennep for pointing out this confirmation of my theory as to the meaning of the double-headed Janus. See his article “Janus Bifrons,” <i>Revue des traditions populaires</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97 <i>sq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macrobius, <i>Saturn.</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 9. 7, “<i>Sed apud nos Janum omnibus praeesse januis nomen ostendit, quod est simile</i> θυραίῳ. <i>Nam et cum clavi ac virga figuratur, quasi omnium et portarum custos et rector viarum</i>”; Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 95, 99, “<i>Sacer ancipiti mirandus imagine Janus⁠ ⁠… tenens dextra baculum clavemque sinistra</i>.”<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i>Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. 89 <i>sqq.</i><a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7-2-1273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>C. Hose and W. McDougall, “The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak,” <i>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 175.<a href="chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-7-2-1273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
