<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Footnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Footnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-2-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 332 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 373 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 352 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Manners and Customs of the Japanese in the Nineteenth Century: from recent Dutch Visitors to Japan, and the German of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ph. <abbr>Fr.</abbr> von Siebold</i> (London, 1841), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shinto</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">the Way of the Gods</i>) (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 41; Michel Revon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Shintoïsme</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 189 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> The Japanese word for god or deity is <i xml:lang="ja">kami</i>. It is thus explained by the native scholar Motoöri, one of the chief authorities on Japanese religion: “The term <i xml:lang="ja">Kami</i> is applied in the first place to the various deities of Heaven and Earth who are mentioned in the ancient records as well as their spirits (<i xml:lang="ja">mi-tama</i>) which reside in the shrines where they are worshipped. Moreover, not only human beings, but birds, beasts, plants and trees, seas and mountains, and all other things whatsoever which deserve to be dreaded and revered for the extraordinary and preeminent powers which they possess, are called <i xml:lang="ja">Kami</i>. They need not be eminent for surpassing nobleness, goodness, or serviceableness alone. Malignant and uncanny beings are also called <i xml:lang="ja">Kami</i> if only they are the objects of general dread. Among <i xml:lang="ja">Kami</i> who are human beings I need hardly mention first of all the successive Mikados⁠—with reverence be it spoken.⁠ ⁠… Then there have been numerous examples of divine human beings both in ancient and modern times, who, although not accepted by the nation generally, are treated as gods, each of his several dignity, in a single province, village, or family.” Hirata, another native authority on Japanese religion, defines <i xml:lang="ja">kami</i> as a term which comprises all things strange, wondrous, and possessing <i xml:lang="ja">isao</i> or virtue. And a recent dictionary gives the following definitions: “<i xml:lang="ja">Kami.</i> 1. Something which has no form but is only spirit, has unlimited supernatural power, dispenses calamity and good fortune, punishes crime and rewards virtue. 2. Sovereigns of all times, wise and virtuous men, valorous and heroic persons whose spirits are prayed to after their death. 3. Divine things which transcend human intellect. 4. The Christian God, Creator, Supreme Lord.” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shinto</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">the Way of the Gods</i>), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8⁠–⁠10, from which the foregoing quotations are made. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Aston himself considers that “the deification of living Mikados was titular rather than real,” and he adds: “I am not aware that any specific so-called miraculous powers were authoritatively claimed for them” (<abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 41). No doubt it is very difficult for the Western mind to put itself at the point of view of the Oriental and to seize the precise point (if it can be said to exist) where the divine fades into the human or the human brightens into the divine. In translating, as we must do, the vague thought of a crude theology into the comparatively exact language of civilised Europe we must allow for a considerable want of correspondence between the two: we must leave between them, as it were, a margin of cloudland to which in the last resort the deity may retreat from the too searching light of philosophy and science.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Revon, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 190 n.<sup>2</sup><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kaempfer, “History of Japan,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 716 <abbr>sq.</abbr> However, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston tells us that Kaempfer’s statements regarding the sacred character of the Mikado’s person cannot be depended on (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shinto, the Way of the Gods</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 41, note †). <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Revon quotes Kaempfer’s account with the observation that, “<i xml:lang="fr">les naïvetés recèlent plus d’une idée juste</i>” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Shintoïsme</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 191, note <sup>2</sup>). To me it seems that Kaempfer’s description is very strongly confirmed by its close correspondence in detail with the similar customs and superstitions which have prevailed in regard to sacred personages in many other parts of the world and with which it is most unlikely that Kaempfer was acquainted. This correspondence will be brought out in the following pages.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-7" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>In Pinkerton’s reprint this word appears as “mobility.” I have made the correction from a comparison with the original (Kaempfer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Japan</i>, translated from the original Dutch manuscript by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Scheuchzer, London, 1728, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 150).<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-8" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Caron, “Account of Japan,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 613. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Varenius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descriptio regni Japoniae et Siam</i> (Cambridge, 1673), <abbr>p.</abbr> 11: “<i xml:lang="la">Nunquam attingebant (quemadmodum et hodie id observat) pedes ipsius terram: radiis Solis caput nunquam illustrabatur: in apertum aërem non procedebat</i>,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The first edition of this book was published by Elzevir at Amsterdam in 1649. The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geographia Generalis</i> of the same writer had the honour of appearing in an edition revised and corrected by Isaac Newton (Cambridge, at the University Press, 1672).<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-9" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i> (Jena, 1874⁠–⁠75), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 287 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 353 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-10" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Klose, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Togo unter deutscher Flagge</i> (Berlin, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 189, 268.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-11" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Labat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation historique de l’Éthiopie occidentale</i> (Paris, 1732), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 254 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-12" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Wunenberger, “La Mission et le royaume de Humbé, sur les bords du Cunène,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-13" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 415 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-14" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 29 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-15" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 355.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-15" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-16" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 336.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-16" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-17" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eine afrikanische Tropen-Insel, Fernando Póo und die Bube</i> (Wien und Olmütz, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 103 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-17" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-18" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Zündel, “Land und Volk der Eweer auf der Sclavenküste in Westafrika,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1877) <abbr>p.</abbr> 402.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-18" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-19" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Béraud, “Note sur le Dahomé,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Vme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1866) <abbr>p.</abbr> 377.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-19" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-20" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 263.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-20" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-21" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bosman’s “Guinea,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 500.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-21" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-22" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Dalzell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Dahomey</i> (London, 1793), <abbr>p.</abbr> 15; Th. Winterbottom, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">An Account of the Native Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone</i> (London, 1803), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-22" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-23" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B. L.</abbr> Durand, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage au Sénégal</i> (Paris, 1802), <abbr>p.</abbr> 55.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-23" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-24" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. S.</abbr> Taberer (Chief Native Commissioner for Mashonaland), “Mashonaland Natives,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 15 (April 1905). <abbr>p.</abbr> 320.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-24" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-25" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 113.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-25" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-26" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Porte, “Les Reminiscences d’un missionnaire du Basutoland,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-26" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-27" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Isis et Osiris</i>, 32.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-27" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-28" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 11, 132.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-28" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-29" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Marsden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Sumatra</i> (London, 1811), <abbr>p.</abbr> 301.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-29" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-30" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 113, quoting De Thuy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Étude historique, géographique et ethnographique sur la province de Tuléar</i>, Notes, Rec., Expl., 1899, <abbr>p.</abbr> 104.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-30" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-31" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The <i>genna</i> amongst the Tribes of Assam,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 98. The word for taboo among these tribes is <i>genna</i>.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-31" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-32" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The Duibhlinn is the part of the Liffey on which Dublin now stands.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-32" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-33" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The site, marked by the remains of some earthen forts, is now known as Rathcroghan, near Belanagare in the county of Roscommon.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-33" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-34" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of Rights</i>, edited with translation and notes by John O’Donovan (Dublin, 1847), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 3⁠–⁠8. This work, comprising a list both of the prohibitions (<i>urgharta</i> or <i>geasa</i>) and the prerogatives (<i>buadha</i>) of the Irish kings, is preserved in a number of manuscripts, of which the two oldest date from 1390 and about 1418 respectively. The list is repeated twice, first in prose and then in verse. I have to thank my friend Professor Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys for kindly calling my attention to this interesting record of a long-vanished past in Ireland. As to these taboos, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. W.</abbr> Joyce, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social History of Ancient Ireland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 310 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-34" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-35" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 418 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-35" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-36" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 70.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-36" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-37" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 759, note <sup>3</sup>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Du caractère religieux de la royauté Pharaonique</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 314⁠–⁠318.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-37" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-38" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>(Sir) <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Scott, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Rangoon, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-38" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-39" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 191 sq.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-39" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-40" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the Gallas the king, who also acts as priest by performing sacrifices, is the only man who is not allowed to fight with weapons; he may not even ward off a blow. See Ph. Paulitschke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 136.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-40" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-41" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Among the Kafirs of the Hindu Koosh men who are preparing to be headmen are considered ceremonially pure, and wear a semi-sacred uniform which must not be defiled by coming into contact with dogs. “The Kaneash [persons in this state of ceremonial purity] were nervously afraid of my dogs, which had to be fastened up whenever one of these august personages was seen to approach. The dressing has to be performed with the greatest care, in a place which cannot be defiled with dogs. Utah and another had convenient dressing-rooms on the top of their houses which happened to be high and isolated, but another of the four Kaneash had been compelled to erect a curious-looking square pen made of poles in front of his house, his own roof being a common thoroughfare” (Sir George Scott Robertson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kafirs of the Hindu Kush</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 466).<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-41" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-42" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Similarly the Egyptian priests abstained from beans and would not even look at them. See Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 37, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann’s note; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Isis et Osiris</i>, 5.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-42" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-43" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Similarly among the Kafirs of the Hindu Koosh the high priest “may not traverse certain paths which go near the receptacles for the dead, nor may he visit the cemeteries. He may not go into the actual room where a death has occurred until after an effigy has been erected for the deceased. Slaves may cross his threshold, but must not approach the hearth” (Sir George Scott Robertson, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 416).<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-43" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-44" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Romanae</i> 109⁠–⁠112; Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 146; Servius on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 179, 448, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 518; Macrobius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 16. 8 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161 <b>a</b>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller. For more details see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marquardt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.<sup>2</sup> 326 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-44" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-45" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Liberia</i> (London, 1906), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1076 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, quoting from Bishop Payne, who wrote “some fifty years ago.” The Bodia described by Bishop Payne is clearly identical with the Bodio of the Grain Coast who is described by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Wilson (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Western Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 353. As to the iron ring which the pontiff wears on his ankle as the badge of his office we are told that it “is regarded with as much veneration as the most ancient crown in Europe, and the incumbent suffers as deep disgrace by its removal as any monarch in Europe would by being deprived of his crown” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Wilson, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129 <abbr>sq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-45" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-46" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Todas</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 98⁠–⁠103.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-46" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-47" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For restrictions imposed on these lesser milkmen see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62, 66, 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 72, 73, 79⁠–⁠81.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-47" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-48" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Todas</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 79⁠–⁠81.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-48" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-49" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 4.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-49" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-50" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 354 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-50" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-51" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 354 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 9, 11.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-51" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-52" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Zweifel et Moustier, “Voyage aux sources du Niger,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), VIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 111.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-52" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-53" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-53" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-54" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Matthews, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage to Sierra-Leone</i> (London, 1791), <abbr>p.</abbr> 75.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-54" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-55" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Winterbottom, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the Native Africans in the Neighbourhood of Sierra Leone</i> (London, 1803), <abbr>p.</abbr> 124.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-55" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-56" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Travels of the Jesuits in Ethiopia</i>, collected and historically digested by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Balthazar Tellez (London, 1710), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 197 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-56" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-57" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners and Customs of the Japanese</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 199 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 355 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-57" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-58" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard, “History of Tonquin,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 744 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-58" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-59" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. A.</abbr> Waddell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Himalayas</i> (Westminster, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 146 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-59" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-60" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>, Second Edition (London, 1832⁠–⁠1836), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 99 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-60" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-61" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 293 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-61" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-62" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The late <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated August 26, 1898.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-62" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-63" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mariner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">An Account of the Natives of the Tonga Islands</i>, Second Edition (London, 1818), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 75⁠–⁠79, 132⁠–⁠136.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-63" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-64" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3. 5, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 3. 11, <abbr>p.</abbr> 304.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-64" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-65" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aristotle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Constitution of Athens</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 2. My friend Professor Henry Jackson kindly called my attention to this passage.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-65" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-66" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 416, and above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 6.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-66" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-67" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> I had some conversation on this subject with Miss Kingsley (1st June 1897) and have embodied the results in the text. Miss Kingsley did not know the rule of succession among the fetish kings.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-67" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-68" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Hutchinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Impressions of Western Africa</i> (London, 1858), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Le Comte <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. N.</abbr> de Cardi, “Ju-ju Laws and Customs in the Niger Delta,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 51.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-68" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-69" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Goldie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calabar and its Mission</i>, New Edition (London, 1901), <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-69" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-70" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Western Africa</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 129. As to the taboos observed by the Bodio or Bodia see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg015">15</a>.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-70" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-71" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 62.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-71" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-72" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marchoux, “Ethnographie, Porto-Novo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue Scientifique</i>, Quatrième Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 595 <abbr>sq.</abbr> This passage was pointed out to me by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. W.</abbr> Thomas.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-72" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-73" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> von Kotzebue, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Entdeckungs-Reise in die Süd-See und nach der Berings-Strasse</i> (Weimar, 1821), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 149.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-73" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-74" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J.</abbr> de Hollander, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding bij de Beofening der Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch Oost-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 606 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In other parts of Timor the spiritual ruler is called <i>Anaha paha</i> or “conjuror of the land.” Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Zondervan, “Timor en de Timoreezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1888) Afdeeling, mehr uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 400⁠–⁠402.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-74" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-75" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Head-hunters, Black, White, and Brown</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 270⁠–⁠272.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-75" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-76" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hahl, “Mittheilungen über Sitten und rechtliche Verhältnisse auf Ponape,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnologisches Notizblatt</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 7. The title of the prime-minister is <i>Nanekin</i>.<a href="chapter-2-1.xhtml#noteref-2-76" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-77" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Salvado, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mémoires historiques sur l’Australie</i> (Paris, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 162; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 282. In this edifying catechism there is little to choose between the savagery of the white man and the savagery of the black.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-77" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-78" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1634, <abbr>p.</abbr> 17; <abbr>id.</abbr>, 1636, <abbr>p.</abbr> 104; <abbr>id.</abbr>, 1639, <abbr>p.</abbr> 43 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-78" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-79" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Rink, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36. The Eskimo of Bering Strait believe that every man has several souls, and that two of these souls are shaped exactly like the body. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 422.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-79" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-80" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-80" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-81" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 461 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1894</i>).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-81" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-82" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 47.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-82" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-83" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptiennes</i> (Paris, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 388 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The ancient Egyptian Doctrine of the Immortality of the Soul</i> (London, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 10 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> In Greek works of art, especially vase-paintings, the human soul is sometimes represented as a tiny being in human form, generally winged, sometimes clothed and armed, sometimes naked. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Jahn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archäologische Beiträge</i> (Berlin, 1847), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Pottier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Étude sur les lécythes blancs attiques</i> (Paris, 1883), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75⁠–⁠79; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">American Journal of Archaeology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1886) pll. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Kern, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aus der Anomia, Archäologische Beiträge Carl Robert zur Erinnerung an Berlin dargebracht</i> (Berlin, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89⁠–⁠95. Greek artists of a later period sometimes portrayed the human soul in the form of a butterfly (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Jahn, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 138 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). There was a particular sort of butterfly to which the Greeks gave the name of soul (ψυχή). See Aristotle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia animalium</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 19, <abbr>p.</abbr> 550 b 26, <abbr>p.</abbr> 551 b 13 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones convivales</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 3. 2.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-83" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-84" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 171.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-84" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-85" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Sundermann, “Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</i>, Bd. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. October 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 453.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-85" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-86" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The late <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated November 3, 1898.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-86" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-87" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Rose, “Note on Female Tattooing in the Panjâb,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-87" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-88" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Over de Bissoes of heidensche priesters en priesteressen der Boeginezen</i> (Amsterdam, 1872), <abbr>p.</abbr> 24 (reprinted from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, Deel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-88" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-89" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 439.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-89" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-90" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, “Low’s Natives of Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-90" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-91" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Head hunters</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 371, 396.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-91" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-92" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Candelier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rio-Hacha et les Indiens Goajires</i> (Paris, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 258 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-92" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-93" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 396.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-93" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-94" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. M.</abbr> Dawson, “On the Haida Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geological Survey of Canada, Report of Progress for 1878⁠–⁠1879</i> (Montreal, 1880), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 B, 139 B.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-94" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-95" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 114, § 665.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-95" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-96" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Radiguet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Derniers Sauvages</i> (Paris, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 245; Matthias G⁠⸺, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lettres sur Iles les Marquises</i> (Paris, 1843), <abbr>p.</abbr> 115; Clavel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Marquisiens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42 note.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-96" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-97" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gagnière, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1860) <abbr>p.</abbr> 439.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-97" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-98" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Blumentritt, “Das Stromgebiet des Rio Grande de Mindano,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermanns Mitteilungen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 111.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-98" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-99" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. d’Orbigny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">L’Homme américain</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 241; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Hutchinson, “The Chaco Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1865) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 322 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Culturländer des alten Amerika</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 476. A similar custom is observed by the Cayuvava Indians (A. d’Orbigny, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 257).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-99" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Modigliani, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Un Viaggio a Nías</i> (Milan, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 283.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 473.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Central Eskimo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 613 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Among the Eskimo of Smith Sound male mourners plug up the right nostril and female mourners the left (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Bessels in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">American Naturalist</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 877; cp. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Murdoch, “Ethnological Results of the Point Barrow Expedition,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 425). This seems to point to a belief that the soul enters by one nostril and goes out by the other, and that the functions assigned to the right and left nostrils in this respect are reversed in men and women. Among the Eskimo of Baffin land “the person who prepares a body for burial puts rabbit’s fur into his nostrils to prevent the exhalations from entering his own lungs” (<abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 144). But this would hardly explain the custom of stopping one nostril only.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Lyon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Private Journal</i> (London, 1824), <abbr>p.</abbr> 370.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i> (The Hague, 1875), <abbr>p.</abbr> 54.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hose and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Shelford, “Materials for a Study of Tatu in Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 65.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Jochelson, “The Koryak, Religion and Myths” (Leyden and New York, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 103 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. F. A.</abbr> Zimmermann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Inseln des Indischen und Stillen Meeres</i> (Berlin, 1864⁠–⁠65), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 386 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare τοῦτον κατ᾽ ὤμου δεῖρον ἄχρις ἡ ψυχὴ | αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ χειλέων μοῦνον ἡ κακὴ λειφθῇ, Herodas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mimiambi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 3 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; μόνον οὐκ ἐπὶ τοῖς χείλεσι τὰς ψυχὰς ἕχοντας, Dio Chrysostom, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 417, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Dindorf; modern Greek μὲ τὴ ψυχὴ ᾽ς τὰ δόντια, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Abbott, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Macedonian Folklore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 193 note; “<i xml:lang="la">mihi anima in naso esse, stabam tanquam mortuus</i>,” Petronius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satyrica</i> 62; “<i xml:lang="la">in primis labris animam habere</i>,” Seneca, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturales quaestiones</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> praef. 16; “<i xml:lang="fr">Voilà un pauvre malade qui a le feu dans le corps, et l’âme sur le bout des lèvres</i>,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> de Brebeuf, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1636, <abbr>p.</abbr> 113 (Canadian reprint); “This posture keeps the weary soul hanging upon the lip; ready to leave the carcass, and yet not suffered to take its wing,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Bentley, “Sermon on Popery,” quoted in Monk’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Bentley</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 382. In Czech they say of a dying person that his soul is on his tongue (Br. Jelínek, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der anthropolog. Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 22).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare the Greek ποτάομαι, ἀναπτερόω, <abbr>etc.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> von den Steinen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 511, 512.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 14 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (separate reprint of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1891</i>).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 207 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 174. Compare Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 14 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Maximus Tyríus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dissertations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 2.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Br. Jelínek, “Materialien zur Vorgeschichte und Volkskunde Böhmens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 22.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, “Het animisme bij de volken van den Indischen Archipel,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Indische Gids</i>, June 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 944.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. L. M.</abbr> Kühr, “Schetsen uit Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 57.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 33; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Over de Bissoes of heidensche priesters en priesteressen der Boeginezen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Makassaarsch-Hollandsch Woordenboek</i>, <abbr>s. vv.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><i>Kôerróe</i> and <i>soemāñgá</i></i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 41, 569. Of these two words, the former means the sound made in calling fowls, and the latter means the soul. The expression for the ceremonies described in the text is <i>ápakôerróe soemāñgá</i>. So common is the recall of the bird-soul among the Malays that the words <i>koer (kur) semangat</i> (“cluck! cluck! soul!”) often amount to little more than an expression of astonishment, like our “Good gracious me!” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 47, note 2.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, “Over de <i>âdá</i>’s of gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegineezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</i> (Amsterdam), Afdeeling Letterkunde, Reeks <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. Deel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 174 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. K.</abbr> Niemann, “De Boegineezen en Makassaren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxviii</span>.(1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 281.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruyt, “Het koppensnellen der Toradja’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</i> (Amsterdam), Afdeeling Letterkunde, Reeks <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. Deel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 162.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 56⁠–⁠58. On traces of the bird-soul in Mohammedan popular belief, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Goldziher, “Der Seelenvogel im islamischen Volksglauben,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 301⁠–⁠304; and on the soul in bird-form generally, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> von Negelein, “Seele als Vogel,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxix</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 357⁠–⁠361, 381⁠–⁠384.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> von den Steinen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 340; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. F.</abbr> im Thurn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Indians of Guiana</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 344 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Fric, “Eine Pilcomayo-Reise in den Chaco Central,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxix</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 233.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shway Yoe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Burman, his Life and Notions</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 100.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Braunschweiger Volkskunde</i> (Brunswick, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Wlislocki, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksglaube und Volksbrauch der Siebenbürger Sachsen</i> (Berlin, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 167.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Western Africa</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 220; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 267. For detention of a sleeper’s soul by spirits and consequent illness, see also Mason, quoted in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 387 note.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 327. The Koryak of North-Eastern Asia also keep awake so long as there is a corpse in the house. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Jochelson, “The Koryak, Religion and Myths,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum for Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leyden and New York, 1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 110.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kurze, “Sitten und Gebräuche der Lengua-Indianer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 18.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, “Low’s Natives of Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 112.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 273; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 127. A similar story is told by the Hindus and Malays, though the lizard form of the soul is not mentioned. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 166, § 679; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Annandale, “Primitive Beliefs and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (April 1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 27 <abbr>sq.</abbr> A similar story is told in Holland (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nederlandsche Sagen</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 250, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 343 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). The story of King Gunthram belongs to the same class; the king’s soul comes out of his mouth as a small reptile (Paulus Diaconus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia Langobardorum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 34). In an East Indian story of the same type the sleeper’s soul issues from his nose in the form of a cricket (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Indische Gids</i>, June 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 940). In a Swabian story a girl’s soul creeps out of her mouth in the form of a white mouse (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Birlinger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 303). In a Saxon story the soul comes out of the sleeper’s mouth in the shape of a red mouse. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Mogk, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Wuttke’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sächsische Volkskunde</i><sup>2</sup> (Dresden, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 318.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shway Yoe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Burman</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 103; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Ferrars, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Burma</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 77; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. G.</abbr> Woodthorpe, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 389; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Blumentritt, “Der Ahnencultus und die religiösen Anschauungen der Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Wiener Geogr. Gesellschaft</i>, 1882, <abbr>p.</abbr> 209; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik-en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 440; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Die Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche geographische Blätter</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 280; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschapelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 4; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> von den Steinen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 340, 510; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Gowing, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Five Thousand Miles in a Sledge</i> (London, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 226; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Masai</i> (Oxford, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 308. The rule is mentioned and a mystic reason assigned for it in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satapatha Brâhmana</i> (part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 371, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling’s translation).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author dated August 26, 1898.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> von den Steinen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 340.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hugh Miller, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">My Schools and Schoolmasters</i> (Edinburgh, 1854), ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 106 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 50.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Annandale, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (April 1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 116, § 530.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Rockhill, “Notes on some of the Laws, Customs, and Superstitions of Korea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">American Anthropologist</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 183.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i> (Münster <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. W., 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 112. The latter writer tells us that the witch’s spirit is also supposed to assume the form of a fly, a hen, a turkey, a crow, and especially a toad.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Holzmayer, “Osiliana,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft zu Dorpat</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1872) <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 53.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Einhorn, “Wiederlegunge der Abgötterey,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, reprinted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scriptores rerum Livonicarun</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 645 (Riga and Leipzig, 1848).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Nore, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coutumes, mythes et traditions des provinces de France</i> (Paris and Lyons, 1846), <abbr>p.</abbr> 88.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 387.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bringaud, “Les Karens de la Birmanie,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 297 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Henry, “The Lolos and other tribes of Western China,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 102.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hose and W. M’Dougall, “The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De los Reyes y Florentino, “Die religiöse Anschauungen der Ilocanen (Luzon),” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der k. k. Geograph. Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span> (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 569 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Seele und ihre Erscheinungswesen in der Ethnographie</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ward, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Five Years with the Congo Cannibals</i> (London, 1890), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 53 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice, “The Western Dénés, their Manners and Customs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Canadian Institute, Toronto</i>, Third Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1888⁠–⁠1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Au pays de l’ours noir, chez les sauvages de la Colombie Britannique</i> (Paris and Lyons, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 75.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clicteur, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> (1830) <abbr>p.</abbr> 479.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Joustra, “Het leven, de zeden en gewoonten der Bataks,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 408.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Meerwaldt, “Gebruiken der Bataks in het maatschappelijk leven,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, li. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 98 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The writer gives <i>tondi</i> as the form of the Batak word for “soul.”<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Römer, “Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst der Karo-Batak’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1908) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In Centraal Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1900), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 148, 152 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 164 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1904⁠–⁠1907), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 112 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 125.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 481.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Perham, “Manangism in Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 19 (Singapore, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 91, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89, 90; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 274, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 272 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. L. M.</abbr> Kühr, “Schetsen uit Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 60 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 225.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pantschatantra</i>, übersetzt von Th. Benfey (Leipzig, 1859), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 124 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Brandes, “Iets over het Pape-gaai-boek, zooals het bij de Maleiers voorkomt,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 480⁠–⁠483. A story of this sort is quoted from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Persian Tales</i> in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Spectator</i> (<abbr>No.</abbr> 578, <abbr>Aug.</abbr> 9, 1714).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Katha Sarit Ságara</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. H.</abbr> Tawney (Calcutta, 1880), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 21 <abbr>sq.</abbr> For other Indian tales of the same general type, with variations in detail, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, Nouvelle Édition, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 183 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 28, § 54.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 104.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 174; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De genio Socratis</i>, 22; Lucian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Muscae encomium</i>, 7. Plutarch calls the man Hermodorus. Epimenides, the Cretan seer, had also the power of sending his soul out of his body and keeping it out as long as he pleased. See Hesychius Milesius, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 162; Suidas, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> Ἐπιμενίδης. On such reported cases in antiquity see further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Rohde, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Psyche</i>,<sup>3</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 91 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of Travels in Europe, Asia, and Africa in the Seventeenth Century by Evliyā Efendī</i>, translated from the Turkish by the Ritter Joseph von Hammer (Oriental Translation Fund), <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 3. I have not seen this work. An extract from it, containing the above narrative, was kindly sent me by Colonel <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Tyrrel, and the exact title and reference were supplied to me by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. A.</abbr> Nicholson, who was so good as to consult the book for me in the British Museum.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Cross, “On the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1854) <abbr>p.</abbr> 311.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. R.</abbr> McMahon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Karens of the Golden Chersonese</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 318.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Mason, “Physical Character of the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, 1866, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. G.</abbr> Woodthorpe, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 23.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. J. S. F.</abbr> Forbes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Burma</i> (London, 1878), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 99 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Shway Yoe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Burman</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 102; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 389.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Guerlach, “Mœurs et superstitions des sauvages Ba-hnars,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 525 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Neumann, “De <i>begoe</i> in de godsdienstige begrippen der Karo-Bataks in de Doesoen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 27.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Grabowsky, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 182.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eleventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 6 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1896</i>).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 414.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 221 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Ph. Wilken en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Schwarz, “Het heidendom en de Islam in Bolaäng Mongondou,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1867) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 263 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i> (Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide, 1881), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 57 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 171 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Flacourt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la grande Isle Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1658), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. L. M.</abbr> Kühr, “Schetsen uit Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 138 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bishop Hose, “The Contents of a Dyak Medicine Chest,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 39, June 1903, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 208.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 146 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V. M.</abbr> Mikhailovskii, “Shamanism in Siberia and European Russia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 69 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Myron Eels, “The Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of Washington Territory,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1887</i>, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 677 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Landes, “Contes et légendes annamites,” <abbr>No.</abbr> 76 in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cochinchine Française: excursions et reconnaissances</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 23 (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 80.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Guerlach, “Chez les sauvages Ba-hnars,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 436, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 453, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1894) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 243 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg045">45</a>.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 509.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. T. H.</abbr> Perelaer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Beschrijving der Dajaks</i> (Zalt-Bommel, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Eenige bijzonderheden betreffende de Papoeas van de Geelvinksbaai van Nieuw-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Neêrlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1854) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 375 <abbr>sq.</abbr> It is especially the souls of children that the spirit loves to take to himself. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Die Papuastämme an der Geelvinkbai,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mitteilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 103; compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 118 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The mists seen to hang about treetops are due to the power of trees to condense vapour, as to which see Gilbert White, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natural History of Selborne</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> letter 29.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Valentyn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oud- en nieuw Oost-Indiën</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 13 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Van Schmidt, “Aanteekeningen nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken, benevens de vooroordeelen en bijgelovigheden der bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa Laut, en van een gedeelte van de zuidkust van Ceram,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 511 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5⁠–⁠8.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Seele und ihre Erscheinungswesen in der Ethnographie</i> (Berlin, 1868), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 36 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Gmelin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise durch Sibirien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 359 <abbr>sq.</abbr> This mode of curing sickness, by inducing the demon to swap the soul of the patient for an effigy, is practised also by the Dyaks and by some tribes on the northern coast of New Guinea. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, “Low’s Natives of Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 117; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. L. M.</abbr> Kühr, “Schetsen uit Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 62 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S. A.</abbr> de Clercq, “De West- en Noordkust van Nederlandsch Nieuw-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het kon. Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 633 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Priklonski, “Todtengebräuche der Jakuten,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lix</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Über das Schamenthum bei den Jakuten,” in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 218 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. N.</abbr> Wilken, “Bijdragen tot de kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1863) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 146 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Why the priest, after restoring the soul, tells it to go away again, is not clear.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel “De Minahasa in 1825,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span> 523.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Graafland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Minahassa</i> (Rotterdam, 1869), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 327 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kramer, “Der Götzendienst der Niasser,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 490 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 357.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Neumann, “Het Pane- en Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>., Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 (1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 302.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, “Religious Beliefs and Practices in Melanesia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 281; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 267.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 229<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Horatio Hale, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnography and Philology</i> (Philadelphia, 1846), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 208 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Ch. Wilkes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</i> (London, 1845), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 448 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Similar methods of recovering lost souls are practised by the Haidas, Nootkas, Shuswap, and other Indian tribes of British Columbia. See <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fifth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1889</i>); <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Report</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30, 44, 59 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 94 (separate reprint of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1890</i>); <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Report</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 462 (in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1894</i>). Kwakiutl medicine-men exhibit captured souls in the shape of little balls of eagle down. See <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> National Museum for 1895</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 561, 575.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 356 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 376.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in the Forests of the Far East</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 189; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 261. Sometimes the souls resemble cotton seeds (Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>). Compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 183.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg, “Verslag omtrent het Eiland Nias,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (Batavia, 1863) <abbr>p.</abbr> 116; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Rosenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der Malayische Archipel</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 174; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Modigliani, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Viaggio a Nías</i> (Milan, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 192.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan à son évêque sur les mœurs et coutumes des Indiens soumis à ses soins,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1834) <abbr>p.</abbr> 178.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Camden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Britannia</i> (London, 1607), <abbr>p.</abbr> 792. The passage has not always been understood by Camden’s translators.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Moret, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Rituel du culte divin journalier en Égypte</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32⁠–⁠35, 83 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1860), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 250.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 171; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in the Southern Isles</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 181 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Cinet, sinnet, or sennit is cordage made from the dried fibre of the coconut husk. Large quantities of it are used in Fiji. See Th. Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 69.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of Missionary Enterprises in the South Sea Islands</i> (London, 1838), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 93, 466 <abbr>sq.</abbr> A traveller in Zombo-land found traps commonly set at the entrances of villages and huts for the purpose of catching the devil. See <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Th. Lewis, “The Ancient Kingdom of Kongo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Geographical Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 554.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1639, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Peuplades de la Sénégambie</i> (Paris, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 277.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Delafosse, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">L’Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 558.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Bentley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life on the Congo</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 71.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in West Africa</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 461 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. L. M.</abbr> Kühr, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 163; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Schetsen uit Borneo’s Westerafdeeling,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Among the Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands “every war-party must be accompanied by a shaman, whose duty it was to find a propitious time for making an attack, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but especially to war with and kill the souls of the enemy. Then the death of their natural bodies was certain.” See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Swanton, “Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida” (Leyden and New York, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 40 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.). Some of the Dyaks of southeastern Borneo perform a ceremony for the purpose of extracting the souls from the bodies of prisoners whom they are about to torture to death. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Grabowsky, “Der Tod, das Begräbnis, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, bei den Dajaken,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</i> (Berlin, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 119.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1637, <abbr>p.</abbr> 50 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i> (the Hague, 1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 78 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Cross, “On the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1854) <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i> (London, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 568 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 569 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 574 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 576 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lysias, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 51, <abbr>p.</abbr> 51 <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Scheibe. The passage was pointed out to me by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyse. As to the mutilation of the Hermae, see Thucydides, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 27⁠–⁠29, 60 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Andocides, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 37 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alcibiades</i>, 18.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg069">69</a>.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> McCullagh, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Church Missionary Gleaner</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 164 (August 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 91. The same account is copied from the “North Star” (Sitka, Alaska, December 1888) in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of American Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 74 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> McCullagh’s account (which is closely followed in the text) of the latter part of the custom is not quite clear. It would seem that failing to find the soul in the head-doctor’s box it occurs to them that he may have swallowed it, as the other doctors were at first supposed to have done. With a view of testing this hypothesis they hold him up by the heels to empty out the soul; and as the water with which his head is washed may possibly contain the missing soul, it is poured on the patient’s head to restore the soul to him. We have already seen that the recovered soul is often conveyed into the sick person’s head.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eleventh Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 571 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1896</i>). For other examples of the recapture or recovery of lost, stolen, and strayed souls, in addition to those which have been cited in the preceding pages, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. N.</abbr> Vosmaer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Korte Beschrijving van het Zuid-oostelijk Schiereiland van Celebes</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 119⁠–⁠123 (this work, of which I possess a copy, forms part of a Dutch journal which I have not identified; it is dated Batavia, 1835); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, “De Topantunuasu of oorspronkelijke volksstammen van Central Selebes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 93; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Neumann, “Het Pane- en Bilastroom-gebeid,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>., Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2 (1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 300 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bei den Minangkabauer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 51 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ris, “De onderafdeeling Klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 529; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Snouck Hurgronje, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Atjèhers</i> (Batavia and Leyden, 1893⁠–⁠4), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 426 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49⁠–⁠51, 452⁠–⁠455, 570 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128, 287; Chimkievitch, “Chez les Bouriates de l’Amoor,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tour du monde</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 622 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Father Ambrosoli, “Notice sur l’île de Rook,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1855) <abbr>p.</abbr> 364; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 388, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 236; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Hügelstämme Assam’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</i>, 1881, <abbr>p.</abbr> 156; Shway Yoe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Burman</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 283 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. M.</abbr> Sproat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scenes and Studies of Savage Life</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 214; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Doolittle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Life of the Chinese</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 110 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> Paxton Hood); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 242; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Cross, “On the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1854) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 sq.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On some Australian Beliefs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 187 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “On Australian Medicine Men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal Anthropological Institute</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 41; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. P.</abbr> Houghton, “On the Land Dayaks of Upper Sarawak,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of the Anthropological Society of London</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1870) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 196 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Dahle, “Sikidy and Vintana,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Annual</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 320 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque lingua, vita et religione pristina commentatio</i> (Copenhagen, 1767), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 416 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. E.</abbr> Jenks, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Bontoc Igorot</i> (Manilla, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 199 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185 <abbr>sq.</abbr> My friend <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith suggested to me that the practice of hunting souls, which is denounced in Ezekiel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span> 17 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, may have been akin to those described in the text.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 440.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 455.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 340.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 511; compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 247.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 226.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1830) <abbr>p.</abbr> 481.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, in a letter to me dated Mengo, Uganda, May 26, 1904.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. E.</abbr> Dennett, “Bavili Notes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 372; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">At the Back of the Black Man’s Mind</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 79.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Childhood</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Hobley, “British East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 327 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 84 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Modigliani, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Viaggio a Nías</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 620, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 624.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 184.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 176.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 461 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1894</i>).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 94, 210 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Man, “Notes on the Nicobarese,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257⁠–⁠259. Compare Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Temple, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Census of India, 1901</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 209.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 143.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 54.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed Ebn-Omar El-Tounsy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage au Darfour</i>, traduit de l’Arabe par le <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Perron (Paris, 1845), <abbr>p.</abbr> 347.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>[Aristotle] <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mirabilibus Auscultationibus</i> 145 (157); <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geoponica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 1. In the latter passage, for κατάγει ἑαυτήν we must read κατάγει αὐτόν, an emendation necessitated by the context, and confirmed by the passage of Damïrï quoted and translated by Bochart, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hierozoicon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> col. 833, “<i xml:lang="la">cum ad lunam calcat umbram canis, qui supra tectum est, canis ad eam</i> [scil. hyaenam] <i xml:lang="la">decidit, et ea illum devorat</i>.” Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religion of the Semites</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 129.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Childhood</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 254.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 612.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. R.</abbr> Pedlow, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 60.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Cornwallis Harris, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Highlands of Aethiopia</i> (London, 1844), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 158.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 313.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Kidd, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 356.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Childhood</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 15, § 122.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92, 94 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1890</i>); compare <abbr>id.</abbr> in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventh Report</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 13 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1891</i>).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “The Jeraeil, or Initiation Ceremonies of the Kurnai Tribe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 316.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore and Legends of some Victorian Tribes</i> (in manuscript).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 267.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 256 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 280 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 32 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Partly from notes sent me by my friend the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, partly from Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston’s account (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 688). In his printed notes (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 39) <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Roscoe says that the mother-in-law “may be in another room out of sight and speak to him through the wall or open door.”<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Picarda, “Autour du Mandera, Notes sur l’Ouzigoua, l’Oukwéré et l’Oudoé (Zanguebar),” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 286.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Porte, “Les Réminiscences d’un missionnaire du Basutoland,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 318.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Romily and <abbr>Rev.</abbr> George Brown, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9, 17.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Border with Crook</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 132. More evidence of the mutual avoidance of mother-in-law and son-in-law among savages is collected in my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>; see the Index, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Mother-in-law.” The custom is probably based on a fear of incest between them. To the almost universal rule of savage life that a man must avoid his mother-in-law there is a most remarkable exception among the Wahehe of German East Africa. In that tribe a bridegroom must sleep with his mother-in-law before he may cohabit with her daughter. See <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 312.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 312; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Benin</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 119; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 110; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 67.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dio Chrysostom, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 230, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Dindorf.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 61.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Gill, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 284 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Blagden. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</i> (London, 1906), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 110.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, in a letter to me dated Mengo, Uganda, May 26, 1904.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Arbousset et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Daumas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage d’exploration</i> (Paris, 1842), <abbr>p.</abbr> 291; Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 83, 303; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Childhood</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69. In the last passage <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kidd tells us that “the mat was <em>not</em> held up in the sun, but was placed in the hut at the marked-off portion where the <i>itongo</i> or ancestral spirit was supposed to live; and the fate of the man was divined, not by the <em>length</em> of the shadow, but by its <em>strength</em>.”<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theocritus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 15 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Philostratus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Heroica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 3; Porphyry, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De antro nympharum</i>, 26; Lucan, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 423 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Drexler, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Meridianus daemon,” in Roscher’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lexikon der griechischen und römische Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 2832 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Bernard Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das Volksleben der Neugriechen</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 119 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Georgeakis et Pineau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore de Lesbos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 342; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Nore, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coutumes, mythes, et traditions des provinces de France</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 214 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Mythologie</i>,<sup>4</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 972; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. L.</abbr> Rochholz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutscher Glaube und Brauch</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 62 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 331; “Lettre du curé de Santiago Tepehuacan,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1834) <abbr>p.</abbr> 180; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> von Stenin, “Die Permier,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxi</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 374; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Louwerier, “Bijgeloovige gebruiken, die door die Javanen worden in acht genomen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholia on Aristophanes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Frogs</i>, 293.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 38. 6; Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 12. 7; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Graecae</i>, 39.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Vernaleken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mythen und Bräuche des Volkes in Österreich</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 341; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das festliche Jahr</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 401; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 207, § 314.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 459.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Weeks, “Notes on some Customs of the Lower Congo People,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1908) <abbr>p.</abbr> 422.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das Volksleben der Neugriechen</i> (Leipzig, 1871), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 196 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Georgeakis et Pineau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore de Lesbos</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 346 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Strausz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Bulgaren</i> (Leipzig, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 199; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 127.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen Siebenbürgens</i> (Hermannstadt, 1866), <abbr>p.</abbr> 27; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 17 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 161.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr. Bruguière, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1831) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 164 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Pallegoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description du royaume Thai ou Siam</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 50⁠–⁠52.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Fytche, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Burma, Past and Present</i> (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 251 note.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On such practices in general, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Culture</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 104 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Liebrecht, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zur Volkskunde</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 284⁠–⁠296; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, “Der Bauopfer bei den Südslaven,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16⁠–⁠24; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Sartori, “Über das Bauopfer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1⁠–⁠54; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Westermarck, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas</i> (London, 1906⁠–⁠1908), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 461 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> For some special evidence, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (as to ancient India); Sonnerat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage aux Indes Orientales et à la Chine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 47 (as to Pegu); Guerlach, “Chez les sauvages Bahnars,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 82 (as to the Sedans of Cochin-China); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 3 (as to the Kayans and Kenyahs of Burma); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Paloppo naar Posso,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56 note (as to central Celebes); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Hearn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Glimpses of Unfamiliar Japan</i> (London, 1894), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 148 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ternaux-Compans, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essai sur l’ancien Cundinamarca</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 70 (as to the Indians of Colombia). These customs are commonly called foundation-sacrifices. But the name is inappropriate, as <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg has rightly observed, since they are not sacrifices but charms.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. F.</abbr> van Braam Morris, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 224.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> de Vries, “Reis door eenige eilandgroepen der Residentie Amboina,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweedie Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 612 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Mann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 241. However, the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lorimer Fison wrote to me that this reported belief in a bright soul and a dark soul “is one of Williams’ absurdities. I inquired into it on the island where he was, and found that there was no such belief. He took the word for ‘shadow,’ which is a reduplication of <i>yalo</i>, the word for soul, as meaning the dark soul. But <i>yaloyalo</i> does not mean the soul at all. It is not part of a man as his soul is. This is made certain by the fact that it does not take the possessive suffix <i>yalo-na</i> = his soul; but <i>nona yaloyalo</i> = his shadow. This settles the question beyond dispute. If <i>yaloyalo</i> were any kind of soul, the possessive form would be <i>yaloyalona</i>” (letter dated August 26, 1898).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Chalmers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pioneering in New Guinea</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 170.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 45 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 462.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</i> (Paris, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 314. The Chinese hang brass mirrors over the idols in their houses, because it is thought that evil spirits entering the house and seeing themselves in the mirrors will be scared away (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">China Review</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 164).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Vuillier, “Chez les magiciens et les sorciers de la Corrèze,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tour du monde</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 522, 524.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nursery Tales, Traditions, and Histories of the Zulus</i> (Natal and London, 1868), <abbr>p.</abbr> 342.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Arbousset et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Daumas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage d’exploration au nord-est de la colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 12; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Lindsay Fairclough, “Notes on the Basuto,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 14 (January 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, “Religious Beliefs and Practices in Melanesia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal Anthropological Institute</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 313; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fragmenta philosophorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. G. A.</abbr> Mullach, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 510; Artemidorus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oneirocritica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 7; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Laws of Manu</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 38 (<abbr>p.</abbr> 135, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bühler’s translation, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg037">37</a>.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 429 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, § 726.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Monseur, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Folklore Wallon</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 40.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 281; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. F.</abbr> Thiselton Dyer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Folk-lore</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 109; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Napier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore, or Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 60; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Madagascar</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 238. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Grandidier, “Des rites funéraires chez les Malgaches,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 215.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Weissenberg, “Die Karäer der Krim,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxiv</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 143; <abbr>id.</abbr> “Krankheit und Tod bei den südrussischen Juden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, xci. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 360.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 169, § 906.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 151, § 1097; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 145 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 61, § 378.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer, “On certain Burial Customs as illustrative of the Primitive Theory of the Soul,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 82 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Among the heathen Arabs, when a man had been stung by a scorpion, he was kept from sleeping for seven days, during which he had to wear a woman’s bracelets and earrings (Rasmussen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Additamenta ad historiam Arabum ante Islamismum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 65, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 69). The old Mexican custom of masking and the images of the gods so long as the king was sick (Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique-Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 571 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) may perhaps have been intended to prevent the images from drawing away the king’s soul.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 117. The objection, however, may be merely Puritanical. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith informed me that the peculiarities of the Raskolniks are largely due to exaggerated Puritanism.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 422.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Owen Dorsey, “A Study of Siouan Cults,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 484; <abbr>id.</abbr> “Teton Folk-lore,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">American Anthropologist</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 143.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise in das innere Nord-America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 417.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 166.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unknown Mexico</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 459 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Simson, “Notes on the Jivaros and Canelos Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 392.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Forbes, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1870) <abbr>p.</abbr> 236.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. R.</abbr> Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Araucanians</i> (London, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 222.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Hetherwick, “Some Animistic Beliefs among the Yaos of British Central Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. A.</abbr> Elmslie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Wild Ngoni</i> (Edinburgh and London, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 70 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Thomson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Through Masai Land</i> (London, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 86.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Clodd, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, referring to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Times</i> of March 24, 1891.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. A.</abbr> Waddell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Himalayas</i> (Westminster, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Dallet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de l’Église de Corée</i> (Paris, 1874), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. This account of Corea was written at a time when the country was still almost secluded from European influence. The events of recent years have naturally wrought great changes in the habits and ideas of the people.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Iets over het bijgeloof in de Minahasa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1870) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Freiherr von Brenner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Besuch bei den Kannibalen Sumatras</i> (Würzburg, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 195.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 314.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“A Far-off Greek Island,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Blackwood’s Magazine</i>, February 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A. E.</abbr> Köhler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</i> (Leipzig, 1867), <abbr>p.</abbr> 423.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 117.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. E.</abbr> Durham, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">High Albania</i> (London, 1909), <abbr>p.</abbr> 107.<a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. H.</abbr> Groome, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In Gipsy Tents</i> (Edinburgh, 1880), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 337 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Napier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore, or Superstitious Beliefs in the West of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 142. For more examples of the same sort, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, Neue Folge (Leipzig, 1889), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-2.xhtml#noteref-2-354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Menander Protector, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fragmenta historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 227. Compare Gibbon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire</i>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 294 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Edinburgh, 1811).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 291 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charles New, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa</i> (London, 1873), <abbr>p.</abbr> 432. Compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 400, 402. For the demons on <abbr>Mt.</abbr> Kilimanjaro, see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Krapf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours in Eastern Africa</i> (London, 1860), <abbr>p.</abbr> 192.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pierre Bouche, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Côte des Esclaves et le Dahomey</i> (Paris, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 133.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. A. L. M.</abbr> Schwaner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Borneo</i> (Amsterdam, 1853⁠–⁠54), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 77.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 167.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 102.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 196.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IVme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1853) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 134 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Rosenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der malayische Archipel</i> (Leipzig, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. W.</abbr> Horst, “Rapport van eene reis naar de Noordkust van Nieuw Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 229.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Capt.</abbr> John Moresby, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Discoveries and Surveys in New Guinea</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 102 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. I.</abbr> Dodge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Our Wild Indians</i> (Hartford, Conn., 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 119.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Crevaux, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages dans l’Amérique du Sud</i> (Paris, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 300.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 78.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kreemer, “Hoe de Javaan zijne zieken verzorgt,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 13. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Lewis, of Woodthorpe, Atkins Rood, Clapham Park, London, S.W., writes to me (July 2, 1902) that his grandmother, a native of Cheshire, used to make bees sting her as a cure for local rheumatism; she said the remedy was infallible and had been handed down to her from her mother.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Baudin, “Le Fétichisme,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 249; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i> (London, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 113 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Allerlei aus Volks- und Menschenkunde</i> (Berlin, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 116.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> de Callone, “Iets over de geneeswijze en ziekten der Daijakers ter Zuid Oostkust van Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indie</i>, 1840, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 418.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. T. H.</abbr> Perelaer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Beschrijving der Dajaks</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 44, 54, 252; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i> (The Hague, 1875), <abbr>p.</abbr> 49.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Grützner, “Über die Gebräuche der Basutho,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</i>, 1877, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 84 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Decle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Three Years in Savage Africa</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 81.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Reichard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsch-Ostafrika</i> (Leipzig, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 431.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg, “Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (Batavia, 1863) <abbr>p.</abbr> 26.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, “Zur Ethnographie der Ontong Java- und Tasman-Inseln,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 112.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. S.</abbr> Weir, “Note on Sacrifices in India as a Means of averting Epidemics,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 35.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. O’Donovan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Merv Oasis</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 58.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Emin Pasha in Central Africa, being a Collection of his Letters and Journals</i> (London, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 107.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Benin</i> (Halifax, England, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 123.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Second Arctic Expedition made by Charles <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Hall</i>, edited by <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Nourse, U.S.N. (Washington, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 269, note. Compare <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Central Eskimo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 609.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Grant, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Walk across Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 104 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 103.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> von Miklucho-Maclay, “Ethnologische Bemerkungen über die Papuas der Maclay-Kuste in Neu-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natuurkundig Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span> 317 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 134.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 403.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Hose, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes on the Natives of British Borneo</i> (in manuscript).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Het koppensnellen der Toradja’s van Midden-Celebes, en zijne beteekenis,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Konikl. Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 204.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholiast on Euripides, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Phoenissae</i>, 1377, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Schwartz.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Conon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrationes</i>, 18; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 19. 12; Francis Fleming, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Southern Africa</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 259; Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 263 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in South Africa, being a Narrative of a Second Journey in the Interior of that Country</i> (London, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 205.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ladislaus Magyar, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen in Süd-Afrika</i> (Buda-Pesth and Leipzig, 1859), <abbr>p.</abbr> 203.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 89.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 62.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. J.</abbr> Andersson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lake Ngami</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 223.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washington Matthews, “The Mountain Chant: a Navajo Ceremony,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 410.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Asiatick Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 535 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr>ed.</abbr> 4to (<abbr>p.</abbr> 537 <abbr>sq.</abbr> <abbr>ed.</abbr> 8vo).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>François Valentyn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 16.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In Centraal Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 165.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 305 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Plano Carpini, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia Mongolorum quos nos Tartaros appellamus</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> D’Avezac (Paris, 1838), cap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. § <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 627, cap. ult. § <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 744, and Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 775; “Travels of William de Rubriquis into Tartary and China,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 82 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paul Pogge, “Bericht über die Station Mukenge,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Afrikanischen Gesellschaft in Deutschland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1883⁠–⁠1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 182 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Coillard, “Voyage au pays des Banyais et au Zambèse,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), VIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 393.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Krapf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels, Researches, and Missionary Labours during an Eighteen Years’ Residence in Eastern Africa</i> (London, 1860), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 252 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 391.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Proyart, “History of Loango, Kakongo,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 583; Dapper, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 340; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Ogilby, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Africa</i> (London, 1670), <abbr>p.</abbr> 521. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 288.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 268 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg008">8</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> von Ende, “Die Baduwis auf Java,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 7⁠–⁠10. As to the Baduwis (Badoejs) see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i> (Leyden, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 640⁠–⁠643.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 107.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. B.</abbr> Neumann, “Het Pane- en Bila- Stroomgebied op het eiland Sumatra,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1886) Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>No.</abbr> 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 300.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Richardson, “Tanala Customs, Superstitions and Beliefs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine, Reprint of the First Four Numbers</i> (Antananarivo, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 219.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Cornwallis Harris, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Highlands of Aethiopia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 171 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Lefebvre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage en Abyssinie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxii</span>.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Cameron, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Across Africa</i> (London, 1877), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 71; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1877) <abbr>p.</abbr> 173.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ebn-el-Dyn el-Eghouâthy, “Relation d’un voyage dans l’intérieur de l’Afrique septentrionale,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1834) <abbr>p.</abbr> 290.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 360.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>.<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 249.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Adventures of Andrew Battel,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 330; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 330; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 262 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Burton, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Abeokuta and the Cameroons Mountains</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 147.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Proyart’s “History of Loango, Kakongo,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 584.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Western Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 202; John Duncan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in Western Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 222. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Reade, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 543.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paul Pogge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Im Reiche des Muata Jamwo</i> (Berlin, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 231.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. T.</abbr> Valdez, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Six Years of a Traveller’s Life in Western Africa</i> (London, 1861), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 256.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. F.</abbr> Mockler-Ferryman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Up the Niger</i> (London, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 38.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baron Roger, “Notice sur le gouvernement, les mœurs et les superstitions des Nègres du pays de Walo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1827) <abbr>p.</abbr> 351.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Schweinfurth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Heart of Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 45 (third edition, London, 1878); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Casati, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ten Years in Equatoria</i> (London and New York, 1891), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 177. As to the various customs observed by Monbutto chiefs in drinking see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Burrows, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land of the Pigmies</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 88, 91.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 526, from information furnished by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Roscoe.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Cornwallis Harris, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Highlands of Aethiopia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 78.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Capt.</abbr> James Cook, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 374 (<abbr>ed.</abbr> 1809).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Heraclides Cumanus, in Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 26, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145 <b>b-d</b>. On the other hand, in Kafa no one, not even the king, may eat except in the presence of a legal witness. A slave is appointed to witness the king’s meals, and his office is esteemed honourable. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. G.</abbr> Massaja, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Vme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 330 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Ph. Paulitschke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas: die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes analytiques sur les collections ethnographiques du Musée du Congo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Arts, Religion</i> (Brussels, 1902⁠–⁠1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage au Darfour</i> (Paris, 1845), <abbr>p.</abbr> 203; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels of an Arab Merchant</i> [Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy] <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">in Soudan</i>, abridged from the French (of Perron) by Bayle <abbr>St.</abbr> John (London, 1854), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage au Ouadây</i> (Paris, 1851), <abbr>p.</abbr> 375.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ibn Batoutah, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Defrémery et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. R.</abbr> Sanguinetti (Paris, 1853⁠–⁠1858), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 441.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Commandant Mattei, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bas-Niger, Bénoué, Dahomey</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 90 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ternaux-Compans, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Essai sur l’ancien Cundinamarca</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 60.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manuscrit Ramirez, histoire de l’origine des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle Espagne selon leurs traditions</i>, publié par <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Charnay (Paris, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 107 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 99.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 170.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ebn-el-Dyn el-Eghouathy, “Relation d’un voyage,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1834) <abbr>p.</abbr> 290; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Duveyrier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Exploration du Sahara: les Touareg du Nord</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 391 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Reclus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 838 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; James Richardson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in the Great Desert of Sahara</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 208.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Wellhausen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reste arabischen Heidentums</i><sup>2</sup> (Berlin, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 196.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tertullian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De virginibus velandis</i>, 17 (Migne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Patrologia Latina</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> col. 912).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pseudo-Dicaearchus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descriptio Graeciae</i>, 18, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geographi Graeci Minores</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 103; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fragmenta Historicorum Graecorum</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 259.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, “Die Landschaft Dawan oder West-Timor,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche geographische Blätter</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 230.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On some Australian Ceremonies of Initiation,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 456.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg030">30</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg005">5</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg008">8</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This rule was mentioned to me in conversation by Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley. However, he is said to have shown himself outside his palace on solemn occasions once or twice a year. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 311 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Benin</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 74. As to the worship of the king of Benin, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 396.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 263. However, a case is recorded in which he marched out to war (<abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 268 <abbr>sq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Crowther and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</i> (London, 1859), <abbr>p.</abbr> 433.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le Commandant Mattei, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bas-Niger, Bénoué, Dahomey</i> (Paris, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67⁠–⁠72. The annual dance of the king of Onitsha outside of his palace is mentioned also by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Crowther and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. C.</abbr> Taylor (<abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 379), and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. F.</abbr> Mockler-Ferryman (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Up the Niger</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 22).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Mission Voulet-Chanoine,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), VIIIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 223.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Partridge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cross River Natives</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 7; compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8, 200, 202, 203 <abbr>sq.</abbr> See also Major <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Leonard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lower Niger and its Tribes</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 371 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> 2. 2 σέβονται δ᾽ ὡς θεοὺς τουσ βασιλεασ, κατακλειστουσ οντασ και οἰκουροὺς τὸ πλέον.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anabasis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 4. 26; Scymnus Chius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orbis descriptio</i>, 900 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geographi Graeci Minores</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Müller, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 234); Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> 30. 6 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Nicolaus Damascenus, quoted by Stobeaus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Florilegium</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span> 41 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 185, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Meineke); Apollonius Rhodius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Argonautica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1026, <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, with the note of the scholiast; Pomponius Mela, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 106, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Parthey. Die Chrysostom refers to the custom without mentioning the name of the people (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 257, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Dindorf).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 4. 19, <abbr>p.</abbr> 778; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 47. Inscriptions found in Sheba (the country about two hundred miles north of Aden) seem to show that the land was at first ruled by a succession of priestly kings, who were afterwards followed by kings in the ordinary sense. The names of many of these priestly kings (<i>makarribs</i>, literally “blessers”) are preserved in inscriptions. See <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. R.</abbr> Driver, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Authority and Archaeology Sacred and Profane</i>, edited by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. G.</abbr> Hogarth (London, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 82. Probably these “blessers” are the kings referred to by the Greek writers. We may suppose that the blessings they dispensed consisted in a proper regulation of the weather, abundance of the fruits of the earth, and so on.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Heraclides Cumanus, in Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 13, <abbr>p.</abbr> 517 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Dallet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de l’Église de Coreé</i> (Paris, 1874), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> xxiv-<span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. The king sometimes, though rarely, left his palace. When he did so, notice was given beforehand to his people. All doors must be shut and each householder must kneel before his threshold with a broom and a dustpan in his hand. All windows, especially the upper ones, must be sealed with slips of paper, lest someone should look down upon the king. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Griffis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Corea, the Hermit Nation</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 222. These customs are now obsolete (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. N.</abbr> Curzon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Problems of the Far East</i>, Westminster, 1896, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154 <abbr>sq.</abbr> note).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This I learned from the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Simpson, formerly artist of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Illustrated London News</i>.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard, “History of Tonquin,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 746.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Shway Yoe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Burman</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 30 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; compare <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 49.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Taplin, “The Narrinyeri,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i> (Adelaide, 1879), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 24⁠–⁠26; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 247.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Taplin, “The Narrinyeri,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 63; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Notes on the Mixed Races of Australia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1875) <abbr>p.</abbr> 53; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 245.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. E. A.</abbr> Meyer, “Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Encounter Bay Tribe,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 196.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 203 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 178, 188, 214.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 302 <abbr>sq.</abbr> See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 341 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Komm herüber und hilf uns!</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Barmen, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 9; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neu-Guinea</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 185 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, “Die Berlinhafen Section, ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie der Neu-Guinea Küste,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 44; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Erdweg, “Die Bewohner der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr. Couppé, “En Nouvelle-Poméranie,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 364; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Graf Pfeil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Studien und Beobachtungen aus der Südsee</i> (Brunswick, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. A.</abbr> Kleintitschen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</i> (Hiltrup bei Münster, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">N.D.</abbr>), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 343 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 330. We have seen that the food left by the king of the Monbutto, is carefully buried (above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg119">119</a>).<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bosman’s “Guinea,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 487.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. N.</abbr> Wilken, “Bijdragen tot de kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1863) <abbr>p.</abbr> 126.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 163 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 19. For other examples of witchcraft wrought by means of the refuse of food, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Legend of Perseus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 83 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the covenant entered into by eating together see the classical exposition of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religion of the Semites</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 269 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> For examples of the blood-covenant, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. C.</abbr> Trumbull, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Blood Covenant</i> (London, 1887). The examples might easily be multiplied.<a href="chapter-2-3.xhtml#noteref-2-482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Kaempfer’s “History of Japan,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 717.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to me dated August 26, 1898. In Fijian, <i>kana</i> is to eat; the meaning of <i>lama</i> is unknown.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Coutumes étranges des indigènes du Djebel-Nouba,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 460; Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Carceri, “Djebel-Nouba,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 450. The title of the priestly king is <i>cogiour</i> or <i>codjour</i>. “The <i>codjour</i> is the pontifical king of each group of villages; it is he who regulates and administers the affairs of the Nubas. He is an absolute monarch, on whom all depend. But he has no princely privileges or immunities; no royal insignia, no badge mark him off from his subjects. He lives like them by the produce of his fields and his industry; he works like them, earns his daily bread, and has no guard of honour, no tribunal, no code of laws, no civil list” (Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Carceri, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Der Muata Cazembe und die Völkerstämme der Maravis, Chevas, Muembas, Lundas und andere von Süd-Afrika,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i> (Berlin), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1856) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 398 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. T.</abbr> Valdez, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Six Years of a Traveller’s Life in Western Africa</i> (London, 1861), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 251 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mariner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natives of the Tonga Islands</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 141 <abbr>sq.</abbr> note, 434 note, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 82 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 221⁠–⁠224; Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Cook, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages</i> (London, 1809), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 427 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Similarly in Fiji any person who had touched the head of a living chief or the body of a dead one was forbidden to handle his food, and must be fed by another (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Erskine, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Western Pacific</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 254).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the custom of touching for the King’s Evil, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 368 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The idea in which this law [the law of taboo or <i>tapu</i>, as it was called in New Zealand] originated appears to have been, that a portion of the spiritual essence of an <i>atua</i> or of a sacred person was communicated directly to objects which they touched, and also that the spiritual essence so communicated to any object was afterwards more or less retransmitted to anything else brought into contact with it” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders</i>, Second Edition, London, 1856, <abbr>p.</abbr> 102). Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Maori Religion and Mythology</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Old New Zealand</i>, by a Pakeha Maori (London, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 96 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Brown, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New Zealand and its Aborigines</i> (London, 1845), <abbr>p.</abbr> 76. For more examples of the same kind see <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 177 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tregear, “The Maoris of New Zealand,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 100.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Te Ika a Maui, or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 165.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 537 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.<sup>2</sup> (London, 1822), <abbr>p.</abbr> 238.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Leonard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lower Niger and its Tribes</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 257 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Merolla’s “Voyage to Congo,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 237 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to these <i>chegilla</i> or taboos on food, which are commonly observed by the natives of this part of Africa, see further my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 614 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i> (Second Edition, London, 1832⁠–⁠1836), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 388. Ellis appears to imply that the rule was universal in Polynesia, but perhaps he refers only to Hawaii, of which in this part of his work he is specially treating. We are told that in Hawaii the priest who carried the principal idol about the country was tabooed during the performance of this sacred office; he might not touch anything with his hands, and the morsels of food which he ate had to be put into his mouth by the chiefs of the villages through which he passed or even by the king himself, who accompanied the priest on his rounds (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> de Freycinet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage autour du monde</i>, Historique, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Première Partie, Paris, 1829, <abbr>p.</abbr> 596). In Tonga the rule applied to chiefs only when their hands had become tabooed by touching a superior chief (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mariner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tonga Islands</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 82 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). In New Zealand chiefs were fed by slaves (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. S.</abbr> Thomson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Story of New Zealand</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 102); or they may, like tabooed people in general, have taken up their food from little stages with their mouths or by means of fern-stalks (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 162).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Old New Zealand</i>, by a Pakeha Maori (London, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 104⁠–⁠114. For more evidence see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Yate, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New Zealand</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 90; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Dieffenbach, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in New Zealand</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 104 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dumont D’Urville, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 530; Father Servant, “Notice sur la Nouvelle Zélande,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1843) <abbr>p.</abbr> 22.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Brown, D.D., <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Melanesians and Polynesians</i> (London, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 402: “The men who took hold of the body were <i>paia</i> (sacred) for the time, were forbidden to touch their own food, and were fed by others. No food wad eaten in the same house with the dead body.”<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mariner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natives of the Tonga Islands</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1818), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 141 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, note.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Bataillon, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1841) <abbr>p.</abbr> 19. For more evidence of the practice of this custom in Polynesia, see Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Cook, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages</i> (London, 1809), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 147; James Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</i> (London, 1799), <abbr>p.</abbr> 363.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Wilkes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</i>, New Edition (New York, 1851), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 99 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Lawes, “Ethnological Notes on the Motu, Koitapu, and Koiari Tribes of New Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1879) <abbr>p.</abbr> 370.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 365; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 238 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 153.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 563.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (separate Reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 331, 332 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hill-Tout, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Far West, the Home of the Salish and Déné</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 193 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. M.</abbr> Dawson, “Notes and Observations on the Kwakiool People of the Northern part of Vancouver Island and adjacent Coasts,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada for the Year 1887</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Montreal, 1888) Trans. Section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 78 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Blumentritt, “Über die Eingeborenen der Insel Palawan und der Inselgruppe der Talamlanen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lix</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 182.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Guis, “Les Canaques, Mort-Deuil,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 208 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Capt.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Armit, “Customs of the Australian Aborigines,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 459.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridley, “Report on Australian Languages and Traditions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1873) <abbr>p.</abbr> 268.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From information given me by <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Roscoe and Miller, missionaries to Uganda (June 24, 1897), and afterwards corrected by the <i>Katikiro</i> (Prime Minister) of Uganda in conversation with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Roscoe (June 20, 1902).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the International Polar Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</i> (Washington, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 46.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexander Mackenzie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages from Montreal through the Continent of North America</i> (London, 1801), <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">cxxiii</span> <a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gavin Hamilton, “Customs of the New Caledonian Women,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 206. Among the Nootkas of British Columbia a girl at puberty is hidden from the sight of men for several days behind a partition of mats; during her seclusion she may not scratch her head or her body with her hands, but she may do so with a comb or a piece of bone, which is provided for the purpose. See <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 41 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1890</i>). Again, among the Shuswap of British Columbia a girl at puberty lives alone in a little hut on the mountains and is forbidden to touch her head or scratch her body; but she may scratch her head with a three-toothed comb and her body with the painted bone of a deer. See <abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In the East Indian island of Ceram a girl may not scratch herself with her fingers the night before her teeth are filed, but she may do it with a piece of bamboo. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 137.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice, “The Canadian Dénés,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Archaeological Report (Toronto), 1905</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 218.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Pittier de Fabrega, “Die Sprache der Bribri-Indianer in Costa Rica,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitzungsberichte der philosophischen-historischen Classe der Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften</i> (Vienna), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">cxxxviii</span> (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Cambridge, 1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 201, 203.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 354.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 276.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, “The Medicine, Surgery, and Midwifery of the Sinaugolo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 302. In Uganda a bride is secluded for a month, during which she only receives near relatives; she wears her veil all this time. She may not handle food, but is fed by one of her attendants. A peasant’s wife is secluded for two or three days only. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Guis, “Les Canaques, ce qu’ils font, ce qu’ils disent,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 119.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Lisiansky, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Voyage Round the World</i> (London, 1814), <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’ Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 153.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Pittier de Fábrega, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 20 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Fawcett, “Note on a Custom of the Mysore ‘Gollaválu’ or Shepherd Caste People,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 536 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Castes and Tribes of Southern India</i> (Madras, 1909), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 287 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Erdweg, “Die Bewohner der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch Neu-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 280.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Rascher, “Die Sulka,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 212; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i> (Stuttgart, 1907), <abbr>p.</abbr> 180.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 87.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Dannert, “Customs of the Ovaherero at the Birth of a Child,” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">South African</i>) <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Folk-lore Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 63.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Levrault, “Rapport sur les provinces de Canélos et du Napo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Deuxième Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1839) <abbr>p.</abbr> 74.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Franz Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (New York, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to Sedna, see <abbr>id.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 119 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 139.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 139 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 140 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 278.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Cadière, “Coutumes populaires de la vallée du Nguôn-So’n,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Hanoi, 1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 353 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dittenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>No.</abbr> 566; Ch. Michel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 730 ἁγνευέτωσαν δὲ καὶ εἰσίτωσαν εἰς τὸν τῆς θεο[ῦ ναὸν]⁠ ⁠… ὡσαύτως δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ κήδους καὶ τεκούσης γυναικὸς δευτεραῖος: Euripides, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Iphigenia in Tauris</i>, 380 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>:</p>
					<p>τὰ τῆς θεοῦ δὲ μέμφομαι σοφίσματα, ἤτις. βροτῶν μὲν ἤν τις ἄψηται φόνου ἥ καὶ λοχείας ἢ νεκροῦ θιγῇ χεροῖν, βωμῶν ἀπείργει, μυσαρὸν ὡς ἡγουμένη.</p>
					<p>Compare also a mutilated Greek inscription found in Egypt (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue archéologique</i>, IIIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 182 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). In the passage of Euripides which I have just quoted an acute verbal scholar, the late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Badham, proposed to omit the line ἢ καὶ λοχείας ἢ νεκροῦ θιγῇ χεροῖν with the comment: “<i xml:lang="la">Nihil facit ad argumentum puerperae mentio; patet versum a sciolo additum.</i>” To do <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Badham justice, the inscription which furnishes so close a parallel to the line of Euripides had not yet been discovered among the ruins of Pergamum, when he proposed to mutilate the text of the poet.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Hawkins, “The Creek Confederacy,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collections of the Georgia Historical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Savannah, 1848) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 78 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Hawkins’s account is reproduced by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. S.</abbr> Gatschett, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Migration Legend of the Creek Indians</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 185 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Philadelphia, 1884). In the Turrbal tribe of southern Queensland boys at initiation were not allowed to scratch themselves with their fingers, but they might do it with a stick. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 596.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Alberti, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Kaffers</i> (Amsterdam, 1810), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 76 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Lichtenstein, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen im südlichen Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1811⁠–⁠12), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 427; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Kay, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels and Researches in Caffraria</i> (London, 1833), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 273 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 208; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Stewart, D.D., <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lovedale, South Africa</i> (Edinburgh, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 105 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, with illustrations.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Old New Zealand</i>, by a Pakeha Maori (London, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 96, 114 <abbr>sq.</abbr> One of the customs mentioned by the writer was that all the people left in the camp had to fast strictly while the warriors were out in the field. This rule is obviously based on the sympathetic connection supposed to exist between friends at a distance, especially at critical times. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 126 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Deuteronomy <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span> 9⁠–⁠14; 1 Samuel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span> 5. The rule laid down in Deuteronomy <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span> 10, 11, suffices to prove that the custom of continence observed in time of war by the Israelites, as by a multitude of savage and barbarous peoples, was based on a superstitious, not a rational motive. To convince us of this it is enough to remark that the rule is often observed by warriors for some time after their victorious return, and also by the persons left at home during the absence of the fighting men. In these cases the observance of the rule evidently does not admit of a rational explanation, which could hardly, indeed, be entertained by anyone conversant with savage modes of thought. For examples, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125, 128, 131, 133, and below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161, 163, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 175 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 178, 179, 181.</p>
					<p>The other rule of personal cleanliness referred to in the text is exactly observed, for the reason I have indicated, by the aborigines in various parts of Australia. See (Sir) George Grey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 344; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 165; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 12; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Beveridge, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1883) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 69 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stanbridge, “On the Aborigines of Victoria,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 299; Fison and Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 251; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 178 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 547; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin <abbr>No.</abbr> 5</i> (Brisbane, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 22, § 80. The same dread has resulted in a similar custom of cleanliness in Melanesia and Africa. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Im Bismarck-Archipel</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 143 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 203 note; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> von Luschan, “Einiges über Sitten und Gebräuche der Eingeborenen Neu-Guineas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</i> (1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 416; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lorimer Fison sent me some notes on the Fijian practice, which agrees with the one described by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Codrington. The same rule is observed, probably from the same motives, by the Miranha Indians of Brazil. See Spix und Martius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise in Brasilien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1251 note. On this subject compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Schwally, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Semitische Kriegsaltertümer</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipzig, 1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures of John Tanner</i> (London, 1830), <abbr>p.</abbr> 122.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>We have seen (<abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg146">146</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg156">156</a>) that the same rule is observed by girls at puberty among some Indian tribes of British Columbia and by Creek lads at initiation. It is also observed by Kwakiutl Indians who have eaten human flesh (see below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg189">189</a>). Among the Blackfoot Indians the man who was appointed every four years to take charge of the sacred pipe and other emblems of their religion might not scratch his body with his fingernails, but carried a sharp stick in his hair which he used for this purpose. During the term of his priesthood he had to fast and practise strict continence. None but he dare handle the sacred pipe and emblems (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Warren, “History of the Ojibways,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collections of the Minnesota Historical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 68 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). In Vedic India the man who was about to offer the solemn sacrifice of soma prepared himself for his duties by a ceremony of consecration, during which he carried the horn of a black deer or antelope wherewith to scratch himself if necessary (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satapatha-Brâhmana</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 31, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 33 <abbr>sq.</abbr> translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 399). Some of the Peruvian Indians used to prepare themselves for an important office by fasting, continence, and refusing to wash themselves, to comb their hair, and to put their hands to their heads; if they wished to scratch themselves, they must do it with a stick. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>p.</abbr> 20. Among the Isistines Indians of Paraguay mourners refrained from scratching their heads with their fingers, believing that to break the rule would make them bald, no hair growing on the part of the head which their fingers had touched. See Guevara, “Historia del Paraguay,” in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> de Angelis’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coleccion de obras y documentos relativos a la historia antigua y moderna de las provincias del Rio de la Plata</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Buenos-Aires, 1836) <abbr>p.</abbr> 30. Amongst the Macusis of British Guiana, when a woman has given birth to a child, the father hangs up his hammock beside that of his wife and stays there till the navel-string drops off the child. During this time the parents have to observe certain rules, of which one is that they may not scratch their heads or bodies with their nails, but must use for this purpose a piece of palm-leaf. If they broke this rule, they think the child would die or be an invalid all its life. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Schomburgk, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen in Britisch-Guiana</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 314. Some aborigines of Queensland believe that if they scratched themselves with their fingers during a rainmaking ceremony, no rain would fall. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 254. In all these cases, plainly, the hands are conceived to be so strongly infected with the venom of taboo that it is dangerous even for the owner of the hands to touch himself with them. The cowboy who herded the cows of the king of Unyoro had to live strictly chaste, no one might touch him, and he might not scratch or wound himself so as to draw blood. But it is not said that he was forbidden to touch himself with his own hands. See my <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 527.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Captivity and Adventures of John Tanner</i> (London, 1830), <abbr>p.</abbr> 123. As to the custom of not stepping over a person or his weapons, see the note at the end of the volume.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Border with Crook</i> (New York, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 133; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 453; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 490.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Kohl, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kitschi-Gami</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 168.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Adventures and Sufferings of John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Jewitt</i> (Middletown, 1820), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 148 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> de Smet, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1842) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr> These customs have doubtless long passed away, and the Indians who practised them may well have suffered the extinction which they did their best to incur.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Adair, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the American Indians</i> (London, 1775), <abbr>p.</abbr> 163.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Adair, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the American Indians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 380⁠–⁠382.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maj. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Marston, in <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Jedidiah Morse’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report to the Secretary of War of the United States on Indian Affairs</i> (New-haven, 1822), Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 130. The account in the text refers especially to the Sauk, Fox, and Kickapoo Indians, at the junction of the Rock and Mississippi rivers.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 149.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For more evidence of the practice of continence by warriors, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Te Ika A Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 189; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Dieffenbach, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in New Zealand</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 85 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Ch. Wilkes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 78; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, “Toaripi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 332; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pioneering in New Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 65; Van Schmidt, “Aanteekeningen nopens de zeden, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, der bevolking van de eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa Laut, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indie</i>, 1843, deel <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 507; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluikharige en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 223; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Galela und Tobeloresen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 68; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 524; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Reclus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nouvelle Géographie universelle</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 126 (compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Biddulph, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 18); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Isaacs, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 120; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religious System of the Amazulu</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 437 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 306; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 203; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 317; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Nassau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fetichism in West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 177; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 63; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Morse, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report to the Secretary of War of the U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> on Indian Affairs</i> (New-haven, 1822), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 130, 131; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 189. On the other hand in Uganda, before an army set out, the general and all the chiefs had either to lie with their wives or to jump over them. This was supposed to ensure victory and plenty of booty. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 59. And in Kiwai Island, off British New Guinea, men had intercourse with their wives before they went to war, and they drew omens from it. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, “Notes on the Natives of Kiwai,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 123.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg151">151</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 350.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The <i>genna</i> amongst the Tribes of Assam,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 100.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Müller, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reizen en Onderzoekingen in den Indischen Archipel</i> (Amsterdam, 1857), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 252.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S. G.</abbr> Gramberg, “Eene maand in de binnenlanden van Timor,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1872) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 208, 216 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Zondervan, “Timor en de Timoreezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1888) Afdeeling, meer uitgebreide artikelen, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 399, 413. Similarly Gallas returning from war sacrifice to the jinn or guardian spirits of their slain foes before they will re-enter their own houses (Ph. Paulitschke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50, 136). Sometimes perhaps the sacrifice consists of the slayers’ own blood. See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg174">174</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg176">176</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg180">180</a>. Orestes is said to have appeased the Furies of his murdered mother by biting off one of his fingers (Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 34. 3).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Parigi, Sigi en Lindoe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 451.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. W.</abbr> Tromp, “Uit de Salasila van Koetei,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 74.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Loria, “Notes on the Ancient War Customs of the Natives of Logea and Neighbourhood,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British New Guinea, Annual Report for 1894⁠–⁠1895</i> (London, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 52.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, “Toaripi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 333.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. E.</abbr> Guise, “On the Tribes inhabiting the Mouth of the Wanigela River, New Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 213 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 298.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-572" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-572" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-573" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 563 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-573" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-574" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Franz Vormann, “Zur Psychologie, Religion, Soziologie und Geschichte der Monumbo-Papua, Deutsch-Neuguinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 410 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-574" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-575" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L. D.</abbr> van der Roest, “Uit het leven der Bevolking van Windessi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, xl. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-575" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-576" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Rosenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der malayische Archipel</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 461.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-576" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-577" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-577" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-578" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Erskine, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Western Pacific</i> (London, 1853), <abbr>p.</abbr> 477.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-578" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-579" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charlevoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 77, 122 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Lafitau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœ urs des sauvages ameriquains</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 279. In many places it is customary to drive away the ghosts even of persons who have died a natural death. An account of these customs is reserved for another work.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-579" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-580" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Keating, <i>Narrative of an Expedition to the Source of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s River</i> (London, 1825), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 109.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-580" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-581" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Baudin, “Féticheurs, ou ministres religieux des Nègres de la Guinée,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 332.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-581" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-582" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Juan de la Concepcion, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia general de Philipinas</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (Manilla, 1791) <abbr>p.</abbr> 387.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-582" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-583" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Loyer, “Voyage to Issini on the Gold Coast,” in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Astley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New General Collection of Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (London, 1745) <abbr>p.</abbr> 444. Among the tribes of the Lower Niger it is customary for the executioner to remain in the house for three days after the execution; during this time he sleeps on the bare floor, eats off broken platters, and drinks out of calabashes or mugs, which are also damaged. See Major <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Leonard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Lower Niger and its Tribes</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 180.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-583" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-584" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Basutos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 258. So Caffres returning from battle are unclean and must wash before they enter their houses (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Alberti, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Kaffers</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 104). It would seem that after the slaughter of a foe the Greeks or Romans had also to bathe in running water before they might touch holy things (Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 719 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-584" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-585" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Porte, “Les Réminiscences d’un missionnaire du Basutoland,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 371. For a fuller description of a ceremony of this sort see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Arbousset et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Daumas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage d’exploration au nord-est de la colonie du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</i> (Paris, 1842), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 561⁠–⁠563.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-585" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-586" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Extrait du journal des missions évangeliques,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1834) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 199 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-586" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-587" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. C.</abbr> Willoughby, “Notes on the Totemism of the Becwana,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 305 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-587" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-588" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Notes on the Bageshu,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1909) <abbr>p.</abbr> 190.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-588" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-589" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-589" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-590" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Wiese, “Beiträge zur Geschichte der Zulu im Norden des Zambesi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 197 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-590" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-591" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-591" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-592" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 138; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Light in Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 220.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-592" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-593" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>p.</abbr> 74. As to the painting of the body red on one side and white on the other see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Hobley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eastern Uganda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 38, 42; Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 868. As to the custom of painting the bodies of homicides, see below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg178">178</a> note <sup>1</sup> and <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg186">186</a> note <sup>1</sup>.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-593" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-594" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Tate, “Further Notes on the Kikuyu Tribe of British East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 264.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-594" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-595" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Hobley, “British East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 353.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-595" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-596" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Alice Werner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natives of British Central Africa</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-596" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-597" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Schinz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 321.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-597" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-598" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. H.</abbr> Brincker, “Heidnisch-religiöse Sitten der Bantu, speciell der Ovaherero und Ovambo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvii</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 289; id., “Charakter, Sitten und Gebräuche speciell der Bantu Deutsch-Südwestafrikas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen des Seminars für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 76.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-598" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-599" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, “Beobachtungen über die Deisidämonie der Eingeborenen Deutsch-Südwest-Afrikas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lviii</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 324; id., in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxvii</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 289; id., in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen des Seminars für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 83.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-599" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-600" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 743 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Hobley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eastern Uganda</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-600" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-601" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Weiss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völkerstämme im Norden Deutsch-Ostafrikas</i> (Berlin, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-601" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-602" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 794; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Hobley, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 31.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-602" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-603" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Numbers <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span> 19⁠–⁠24.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-603" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-604" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Casalis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Basutos</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 258 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-604" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-605" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 493⁠–⁠495; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 563⁠–⁠568. The writers suggest that the practice of painting the slayers black is meant to render them invisible to the ghost. A widow, on the contrary, must paint her body white, in order that her husband’s spirit may see that she is mourning for him.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-605" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-606" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> von Langsdorff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise um die Welt</i> (Frankfurt, 1812), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 114 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-606" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-607" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 55 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-607" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-608" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kubary, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer</i> (Berlin, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 126 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 130.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-608" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-609" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> Thevet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Singularités de la France Antarctique, autrement nommée Amérique</i> (Antwerp, 1558), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 74⁠–⁠76; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cosmographie universelle</i> (Paris, 1575), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 944 [978] <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Pero de Magalhanes de Gandavo, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la province de Sancta-Cruz</i> (Paris, 1837), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 134⁠–⁠141 (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ternaux-Compans, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages, relations, et mémoires originaux pour servir à l’histoire de la découverte de l’Amérique</i>; the original of Gandavo’s work was published in Portuguese at Lisbon in 1576); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Lery, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia navigationis in Brasiliam, quae et America dicitur</i> (1586), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183⁠–⁠194; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Captivity of Hans Stade of Hesse, in <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1547⁠–⁠1555, among the Wild Tribes of Eastern Brazil</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Tootal (London, 1874), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 155⁠–⁠159; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Lafitau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs des sauvages ameriquains</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 292 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.<sup>2</sup> 227⁠–⁠232.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-609" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-610" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Relation des Natchez,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages au nord</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 24 (Amsterdam, 1737); <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lettres édifiantes et curieuses</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 26; Charlevoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 186 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-610" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-611" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bossu, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nouveaux Voyages aux Indes occidentales</i> (Paris, 1768), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 94.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-611" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-612" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 63.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-612" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-613" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 357.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-613" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-614" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. O.</abbr> Dorsey, “An Account of the War Customs of the Osages,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">American Naturalist</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 126.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-614" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-615" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Catlin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North American Indians</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 246.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-615" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-616" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 553; <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Grossman, cited in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 475 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The custom of plastering the head with mud was observed by Egyptian women in mourning (Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 85; Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 91). Among some of the aboriginal tribes of Victoria and New South Wales widows wore a thick skullcap of clay or burned gypsum, forming a cast of the head, for some months after the death; when the period of mourning was over, the cap was removed, baked in the fire, and laid on the husband’s grave. One of these widows’ caps is exhibited in the British Museum. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. L.</abbr> Mitchell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Three Expeditions into the Interior of Eastern Australia</i> (London, 1838), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 251 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 354; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 86; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Krefft, “On the Manners and Customs of the Aborigines of the Lower Murray and Darling,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Philosophical Society of New South Wales</i>, 1862⁠–⁠1865 (Sydney, 1866), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 373 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 66; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stanbridge, “On the Aborigines of Victoria,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Oldfield, “The Aborigines of Australia,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1865) <abbr>p.</abbr> 248; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Bonney, “On some Customs of the Aborigines of the River Darling, New South Wales,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 135; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 88, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 238 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 21; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248, 452; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Etheridge, jun., “The ‘Widow’s Cap’ of the Australian Aborigines,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Linnaean Society of New South Wales for the Year 1899</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (Sydney, 1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 333⁠–⁠345 (with illustrations). In the Andaman Islands mourners coat their heads with a thick mass of white clay (Jagor, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie</i>, 1876, <abbr>p.</abbr> (57); M. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Portman, “Disposal of the Dead among the Andamanese,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 57; compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Man, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aboriginal Inhabitants of the Andaman Islands</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73, 75). Among the Bahima of the Uganda Protectorate, when herdsmen water their cattle in the evening, they plaster their faces and bodies with white clay, at the same time stiffening their hair with mud into separate lumps. This mud is left on the head for days till it crumbles into dust (Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 626, compare 620).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-616" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-617" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Russell, “The Pima Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-617" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-618" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Border with Crook</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 203.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-618" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-619" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Russell, “The Pima Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Twenty-Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 204.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-619" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-620" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Hearne, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey from Prince of Wales’s Fort in Hudson’s Bay to the Northern Ocean</i> (London, 1795), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 204⁠–⁠206. The custom of painting the face or the body of the manslayer, which may perhaps be intended to disguise him from the vengeful spirit of the slain, is practised by other peoples, as by the Nandi (see above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg175">175</a>). Among the Ba-Yaka of the Congo Free State a man who has been slain in battle is supposed to send his soul to avenge his death on his slayer; but the slayer can protect himself against the ghost by wearing the red tail-feathers of a parrot in his hair and painting his forehead red (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Torday and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. A.</abbr> Joyce, “Notes on the Ethnography of the Ba-Yaka,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50 <abbr>sq.</abbr>). Among the Borâna Gallas, when a war-party has returned to the village, the victors who have slain a foe are washed by the women with a mixture of fat and butter, and their faces are painted with red and white (Ph. Paulitschke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographie Nord-ost-Afrikas: die materielle Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 258). When Masai warriors kill enemies in fight they paint the right half of their own bodies red and the left half white (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Masai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 353). Among the Wagogo of German East Africa, a man who has killed an enemy in battle paints a red circle round his right eye and a black circle round his left eye (<abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cole, “Notes on the Wagogo of German East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 314). Among the Angoni of central Africa, after a successful raid, the leader calls together all who have killed an enemy and paints their faces and heads white; also he paints a white band round the body under the arms and across the chest (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Central Africa Gazette</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 86, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 6 (April 30, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 2). A Koossa Caffre who has slain a man is accounted unclean. He must roast some flesh on a fire kindled with wood of a special sort which imparts a bitter flavour to the meat. This flesh he eats, and afterwards blackens his face with the ashes of the fire. After a time he may wash himself, rinse his mouth with fresh milk, and paint himself brown again. From that moment he is clean (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Lichtenstein, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen im südlichen Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 418). Among the Yabim of German New Guinea, when the relations of a murdered man have accepted a bloodwit instead of avenging his death, they must allow the family of the murderer to mark them with chalk on the brow. If this is not done, the ghost of their murdered kinsman may come and trouble them for not doing their duty by him; for example, he may drive away their swine or loosen their teeth (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 99). In this last case the marking the face with chalk seems to be clearly a disguise to outwit the ghost.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-620" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-621" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Owen Dorsey, “Omaha Sociology,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Third Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 369.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-621" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-622" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plato, Laws, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 865 D-866 A; Demosthenes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contra Aristocrates</i> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 643 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Hesychius, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> ἀπενιαυτιαμὸς.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-622" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-623" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Euripides, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Iphigenia in Tauris</i> 940 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 31. 8. We may compare the wanderings of the other matricide Alcmaeon, who could find no rest till he came to a new land on which the sun had not yet shone when he murdered his mother (Thucydides, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 102; Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 7. 5; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 24. 8).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-623" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-624" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Polybius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 21.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-624" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-625" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> National Museum for 1895</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 440, 537 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-625" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-626" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ruys, “Bezoek an den Kannibalenstam van Noord Nieuw-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 328. Among these savages the genitals of a murdered man are eaten by an old woman, and the genitals of a murdered woman are eaten by an old man. What the object of this curious practice may be is not apparent. Perhaps the intention is to unsex and disarm the dangerous ghost. On the dread of ghosts, especially the ghosts of those who have died a violent death, see further <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Psyche’s Task</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 52 sqq.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-626" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-627" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Meantime I may refer the reader to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 389 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-627" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-628" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Adventures and Sufferings of John <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Jewitt</i> (Middletown, 1820), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 133, 136.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-628" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-629" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg160">160</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-629" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-630" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baron d’Unienville, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Statistique de l’Île Maurice</i> (Paris, 1838), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 271. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et Totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 253, who refers to Le Gentil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage dans les Mers de l’Inde</i> (Paris, 1781), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 562.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-630" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-631" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">U.</abbr> Lisiansky, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage Round the World</i> (London, 1814), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 174, 209.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-631" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-632" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, “The Ethnography of the Western Tribe of Torres Straits,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 397; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 271.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-632" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-633" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Haddon, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 467.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-633" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-634" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 271 note.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-634" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-635" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. E.</abbr> Guise, “On the Tribes inhabiting the Mouth of the Wanigela River,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 218. The account refers specially to Bulaa, which the author describes (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 205, 217) as “a marine village” and “the greatest fishing village in New Guinea.” Probably it is built out over the water. This would explain the allusion to the sanctified headman going ashore daily at sundown.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-635" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-636" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. R.</abbr> Barton and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Strong, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 292, 293 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-636" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-637" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Island of Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</i> (Philadelphia and London, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 38 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 44 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Though the fisherman may have nothing to do with his wife and family, he is not wholly debarred from female society; for each of the men’s clubhouses has one young woman, or sometimes two young women, who have been captured from another district, and who cohabit promiscuously with all the men of the clubhouse. The name for one of these concubines is <i>mispil</i>. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> There is a similar practice of polyandry in the men’s clubhouses of the Pelew Islands. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kubary, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer</i> (Berlin, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Compare <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>, Second Edition, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 435 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-637" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-638" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S.</abbr> Kubary, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Beiträge zur Kenntnis des Karolinen Archipels</i> (Leyden, 1895), <abbr>p.</abbr> 127.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-638" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-639" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 257. In Chota Nagpur and the Central Provinces of India the rearers of silkworms “carefully watch over and protect the worms, and while the rearing is going on, live with great cleanliness and self-denial, abstaining from alcohol and all intercourse with women, and adhering very strictly to certain ceremonial observances. The business is a very precarious one, much depending on favourable weather” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Museum Notes, issued by the Trustees</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 3 (Calcutta, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 160).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-639" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-640" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe in letters to me dated Mengo, Uganda, April 23 and June 6, 1903.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-640" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-641" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-641" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-642" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Weeks, “Anthropological Notes on the Bangala of the Upper Congo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1909) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 458, 459.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-642" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-643" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Thomas, “De jacht op het eiland Nias,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 276 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-643" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-644" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pioneering in New Guinea</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-644" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-645" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Reichard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsch-Ostafrika</i> (Leipzig, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 427.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-645" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-646" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 123.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-646" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-647" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr. Le Roy, “Les Pygmées,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 269.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-647" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-648" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unknown Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 40 sq.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-648" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-649" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice, “Notes, Archaeological, Industrial, and Sociological on the Western Denés,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Canadian Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1892⁠–⁠93) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 107, 108.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-649" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-650" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. C.</abbr> Stevenson, “The Sia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 118.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-650" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-651" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tenth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 47 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1895</i>).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-651" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-652" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 90 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1890</i>).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-652" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-653" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 347.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-653" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-654" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 348.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-654" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-655" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washington Matthews, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnography and Philology of the Hidatsa Indians</i> (Washington, 1877), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58⁠–⁠60. Other Indian tribes also observe elaborate superstitious ceremonies in hunting eagles. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 182, 187 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-655" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-656" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 141.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-656" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-657" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Ch. Gilhodes, “La Culture matérielle des Katchins (Birmanie),” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 622. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Anderson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">From Mandalay to Momien</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 198, who observes that among the Kakhyens (Kachins) the brewing of beer “is regarded as a serious, almost sacred, task, the women, while engaged in it, having to live in almost vestal seclusion.”<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-657" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-658" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 410 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis’s authority.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-658" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-659" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Weiss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker-Stämme im Norden Deutsch-Ostafrikas</i> (Berlin, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 396.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-659" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-660" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, “Bijdrage tot de Kennis der Alfoeren van het eiland Boeroe,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 30 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-660" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-661" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-661" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-662" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> von Langsdorff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise um die Welt</i> (Frankfurt, 1812), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 118 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-662" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-663" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> von Langsdorff, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 117.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-663" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-664" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, traduite par <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Jourdanet et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Simeon, <abbr>p.</abbr> 45.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-664" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-665" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 148.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-665" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-666" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dameon Grangeon, “Les Chams et leurs superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-666" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-667" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, “Mœurs et superstitions de la tribu Bélep,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 215; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 191 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-667" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-668" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i> (Stuttgart, 1907), <abbr>p.</abbr> 99.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-668" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-669" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. R.</abbr> Barton, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 100⁠–⁠102. The native words which I have translated respectively “skipper” and “mate” are <i>baditauna</i> and <i>doritauna</i>. The exact meaning of the words is doubtful.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-669" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-670" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Quoted by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> George Turner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samoa</i> (London, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 349 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-670" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-671" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M.</abbr> Hildebrandt, “Ethnographische Notizen über Wakamba und ihre Nachbarn,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 401.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-671" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-672" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Tate, “Further Notes on the Kikuyu Tribe of British East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 260 <abbr>sq.</abbr> At the festivals sheep and goats are sacrificed to God (<i>Ngai</i>), and the people feast on the roast flesh.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-672" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-673" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 438, 440.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-673" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-674" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 440, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 380 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The bladder festival of these Eskimo will be described in a later part of this work.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-674" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-675" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Petroff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report on the Population, Industries, and Resources of Alaska</i> (preface dated August 7, 1882), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-675" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-676" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Dall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alaska and its Resources</i> (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 404.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-676" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-677" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Central Eskimo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sixth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1888), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 584 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 595; <abbr>id.</abbr> “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 121⁠–⁠124. See also <abbr>id.</abbr> “Die Sagen der Baffin-land Eskimo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</i> (1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings and Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Montreal, 1888) section <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Hall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life with the Esquimaux</i> (London, 1864), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 321 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Second Arctic Expedition made by Charles <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Hall</i>, edited by Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Nourse (Washington, 1879), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 191 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-677" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-678" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is, the wizard or sorcerer.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-678" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-679" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>That is, the wizard or sorcerer.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-679" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-680" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 119⁠–⁠121, 124⁠–⁠126. In quoting these passages I have changed the spelling of a few words in accordance with English orthography.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-680" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-681" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. P.</abbr> Cayzac, “La Religion des Kikuyu,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 311.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-681" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-682" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. P.</abbr> Cayzac, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr> The nature of the “ignoble ceremony” of transferring sin to a he-goat is not mentioned by the missionary. It can hardly have been the simple Jewish one of laying hands on the animal’s head.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-682" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-683" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. W.</abbr> Harmon, in <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Jedidiah Morse’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report to the Secretary of War of the United States on Indian Affairs</i> (New-haven, 1822), <abbr>p.</abbr> 345. The Carriers are an Indian tribe of Northwest America who call themselves <i>Ta-cul-lies</i>, “a people who go upon water” (<abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 343).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-683" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-684" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Francis <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Nicholas, “The Aborigines of Santa Maria, Colombia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">American Anthropologist</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 639⁠–⁠641.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-684" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-685" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Herrera, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The General History of the Vast Continent and Islands of America</i>, translated by <abbr>Capt.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Stevens (London, 1725⁠–⁠26), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 148. The confession of sins appears to have held an important place in the native religion of the American Indians, particularly the Mexicans and Peruvians. There is no sufficient reason to suppose that they learned the practice from Catholic priests. For more evidence of the custom among the aborigines of America see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. H.</abbr> Morgan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">League of the Iroquois</i> (Rochester, U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> America, 1851), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 170 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 187 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> de Sahagun, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle Espagne</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> ch. 12, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> ch. 7, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 22⁠–⁠27, 339⁠–⁠344 (Jourdanet and Simeon’s French translation); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Herrera, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 173, 190; Diego de Landa, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation des choses de Yucatan</i> (Paris, 1864), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Brasseur de Bourbourg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire des nations civilisées du Mexique et de l’Amérique Centrale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 114 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 567, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 567⁠–⁠569; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Extirpacion de la idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18, 28 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-685" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-686" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>As to this means of hastening the delivery see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 248 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> The intention of the exchange of clothes at childbirth between husband and wife seems to be to relieve the woman by transferring the travail pangs to the man.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-686" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-687" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Ferrand, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Musulmans à Madagascar</i>, Deuxième Partie (Paris, 1893), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 20 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-687" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-688" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Religion des Veda</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 319 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-688" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-689" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satapatha Brâhmana</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 397 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-689" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-690" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The similarity of some of the Mosaic laws to savage customs has struck most Europeans who have acquired an intimate knowledge of the savage and his ways. They have often explained the coincidences as due to a primitive revelation or to the dispersion of the Jews into all parts of the earth. Some examples of these coincidences were cited in my article “Taboo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopaedia Britannica</i>,<sup>9</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span> 17. The subject has since been handled, with consummate ability and learning, by my lamented friend <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion of the Semites</i> (New Edition, London, 1894). In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Psyche’s Task</i> I have illustrated by examples the influence of superstition on the growth of morality.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-690" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-691" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 106 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-691" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-692" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Adair, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the American Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 118.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-692" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-693" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. J.</abbr> Andersson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lake Ngami</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 224.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-693" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-694" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Alberti, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Kaffers aan de Zuidkust van Afrika</i> (Amsterdam, 1810), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 158 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Lichtenstein, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen im südlichen Africa</i> (Berlin, 1811⁠–⁠12), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 419. These accounts were written about a century ago. The custom may since have become obsolete. A similar remark applies to other customs described in this and the following paragraph.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-694" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-695" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Kolbe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Present State of the Cape of Good Hope</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span><sup>2</sup> (London, 1738) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 251⁠–⁠255. The reason alleged for the custom is to allow the slayer to recruit his strength. But the reason is clearly inadequate as an explanation of this and similar practices.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-695" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-696" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Scheffer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lapponia</i> (Frankfurt, 1673), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 234⁠–⁠243; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque lingua, vita et religione pristina commentatio</i> (Copenhagen, 1767), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 502 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Jessen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Finnorum Lapponumque Nouvegicorum religione pagana tractatus singularis</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (bound up with Leemius’s work).<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-696" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-697" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Kay, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels and Researches in Caffraria</i> (London, 1833), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 341 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-697" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-698" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Duncan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in Western Africa</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 195 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. E.</abbr> Forbes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dahomey and the Dahomans</i> (London, 1851), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 107; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Bouche, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Côte des Esclaves</i> (Paris, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 397; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-698" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-699" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 224. Many of the above examples of expiation exacted for the slaughter of animals have already been cited by me in a note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 7. 7, where I suggested that the legendary purification of Apollo for the slaughter of the python at Delphi (Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Graecae</i>, 12; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De defectu oraculorum</i>, 15; Aelian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Varia Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1) may be a reminiscence of a custom of this sort.<a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-699" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-700" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Cadière, “Croyances et dictons populaires de la Vallée du Nguôn-son, Province de Quang-binh (Annam),” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême Orient</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-4.xhtml#noteref-2-700" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-701" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the nature of taboo see my article “Taboo” in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopaedia Britannica</i>, 9th edition, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1888) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 15 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion of the Semites</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 148 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 446 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Some languages have retained a word for that general idea which includes under it the notions which we now distinguish as sanctity and pollution. The word in Latin is <i xml:lang="la">sacer</i>, in Greek, ἅγιος. In Polynesian it is <i>tabu</i> (Tongan), <i>tapu</i> (Samoan, Tahitian, Marquesan, Maori, <abbr>etc.</abbr>), or <i>kapu</i> (Hawaiian). See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tregear, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary</i> (Wellington, N.Z., 1891), <abbr>s. v.</abbr> <i>tapu</i>. In Dacotan the word is <i>wakan</i>, which in Riggs’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dakota-English Dictionary</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contributions to North American Ethnology</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>., Washington, 1890, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 507 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) is defined as “<em>spiritual</em>, <em>sacred</em>, <em>consecrated</em>; <em>wonderful</em>, <em>incomprehensible</em>; said also of women at the menstrual period.” Another writer in the same dictionary defines <i>wakan</i> more fully as follows: “<em>Mysterious</em>; <em>incomprehensible</em>; <em>in a peculiar state, which, from not being understood, it is dangerous to meddle with</em>; hence the application of this word to women at the <em>menstrual period</em>, and from hence, too, arises the feeling among the wilder Indians, that if the Bible, the church, the missionary, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are ‘wakan,’ they are to be <em>avoided</em>, or <em>shunned</em>, not as being <em>bad</em> or <em>dangerous</em>, but as wakan. The word seems to be the only one suitable for <em>holy</em>, <em>sacred</em>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, but the common acceptation of it, given above, makes it quite misleading to the <em>heathen</em>.” On the notion designated by <i>wakan</i>, see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> Pond, “Dakota Superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collections of the Minnesota Historical Society for the year 1867</i> (Saint Paul, 1867), <abbr>p.</abbr> 33; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Owen Dorsey, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eleventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 366 <abbr>sq.</abbr> It is characteristic of the equivocal notion denoted by these terms that, whereas the condition of women in childbed is commonly regarded by the savage as what we should call unclean, among the Herero the same condition is described as holy; for some time after the birth of her child, the woman is secluded in a hut made specially for her, and every morning the milk of all the cows is brought to her that she may consecrate it by touching it with her mouth. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Schinz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsch-Südwest-Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 167. Again, whereas a girl at puberty is commonly secluded as dangerous, among the Warundi of eastern Africa she is led by her grandmother all over the house and obliged to touch everything (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Durch Massailand sur Nilquelle</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 221), as if her touch imparted a blessing instead of a curse.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-701" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-702" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Agis</i>, 19.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-702" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-703" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 102.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-703" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-704" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Cambodge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Paris, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 25.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-704" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-705" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Moura, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Royaume du Cambodge</i> (Paris, 1883), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 226.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-705" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-706" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Dallet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de l’Église de Corée</i> (Paris, 1874), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Griffis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Corea, the Hermit Nation</i> (London, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 219. These customs are now obsolete (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. N.</abbr> Curzon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Problems of the Far East</i> (Westminster, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154 <abbr>sq.</abbr> note).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-706" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-707" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Macrobius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 19. 13; Servius on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 448; Joannes Lydus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 31. We have already seen (<abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg016">16</a>) that the hair of the Flamen Dialis might only be cut with a bronze knife. The Greeks attributed a certain cleansing virtue to bronze; hence they employed it in expiatory rites, at eclipses, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> See the Scholiast on Theocritus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 36.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-707" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-708" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acta Fratrum Arvalium</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Henzen (Berlin, 1874), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128⁠–⁠135; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Marquardt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Römische Staatsverwaltung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.<sup>2</sup> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das Sacralwesen</i>) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 459 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-708" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-709" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Praecepta gerendae reipublicae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span> 7. Plutarch here mentions that gold was also excluded from some temples. At first sight this is surprising, for in general neither the gods nor their ministers have displayed any marked aversion to gold. But a little enquiry suffices to clear up the mystery and set the scruple in its proper light. From a Greek inscription discovered some years ago we learn that no person might enter the sanctuary of the Mistress at Lycosura wearing golden trinkets, unless for the purpose of dedicating them to the goddess; and if anyone did enter the holy place with such ornaments on his body but no such pious intention in his mind, the trinkets were forfeited to the use of religion. See Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική (Athens, 1898), col. 249; Dittenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>No.</abbr> 939. The similar rule, that in the procession at the mysteries of Andania no woman might wear golden ornaments (Dittenberger, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>No.</abbr> 653), was probably subject to a similar exception and enforced by a similar penalty. Once more, if the maidens who served Athena on the Acropolis at Athens put on gold ornaments, the ornaments became sacred, in other words, the property of the goddess (Harpocration, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> ἀρρηφορεῖν, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 59, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Dindorf). Thus it appears that the pious scruple about gold was concerned rather with its exit from, than with its entrance into, the sacred edifice. At the sacrifice to the Sun in ancient Egypt worshippers were forbidden to wear golden trinkets and to give hay to an ass (Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Isis et Osiris</i>, 30)⁠—a singular combination of religious precepts. In India gold and silver are common totems, and members of such clans are forbidden to wear gold and silver trinkets respectively. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 24.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-709" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-710" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Callimachus, referred to by the Old Scholiast on Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ibis</i>. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Callimachea</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Schneider, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 282, Frag. 100<sup>a</sup> E.; Chr. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Lobeck, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aglaophamus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 686.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-710" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-711" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aristides</i>, 21. This passage was pointed out to me by my friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyse.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-711" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-712" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Theophilus Hahn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tsuni-Goam, the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</i> (London, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 22.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-712" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-713" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. H.</abbr> Brincker, “Charakter, Sitten und Gebräuche speciell der Bantu Deutsch-Südwestafrikas,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen des Seminars für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1900) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 80.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-713" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-714" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 38.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-714" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-715" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Island of Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</i> (Philadelphia and London, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 151.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-715" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-716" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Snake Dance of the Moquis of Arizona</i> (New York, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 178 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-716" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-717" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Grinnell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pawnee Hero Stories and Folk-tales</i> (New York, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 253.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-717" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-718" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg205">205</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-718" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-719" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 392.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-719" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-720" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 383.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-720" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-721" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 149.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-721" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-722" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Gordon Cumming, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In the Hebrides</i> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 195.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-722" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-723" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Logan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Scottish Gael</i> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> Alexander Stewart), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 68 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-723" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-724" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262, 298, 299.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-724" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-725" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Maclagan, M.D., “Notes on Folklore Objects from Argyleshire,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 157; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 263⁠–⁠266. The shoulder-blades of sheep have been used in divination by many peoples, for example by the Corsicans, South Slavs, Tartars, Kirghiz, Calmucks, Chukchees, and Lolos, as well as by the Scotch. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Brand, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 339 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Bohn’s <abbr>ed.</abbr>); Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Origin of Civilisation</i>,<sup>4</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 237 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Ch. Rogers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Life in Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 224; Camden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Britannia</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gibson (London, 1695), col. 1046; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> MacPhail, “Traditions, Customs, and Superstitions of the Lewis,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 167; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 515 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Gregorovius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Corsica</i>, (London, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 187; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 166⁠–⁠170; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. E.</abbr> Durham, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">High Albania</i> (London, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 104 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i> (Algiers, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 371; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Radloff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Proben der Volksliteratur der türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 115, note 1, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 132; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Mythologie</i>,<sup>4</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 932; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Rockhill, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land of the Lamas</i> (London, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 176, 341⁠–⁠344; <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr> Pallas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen Reichs</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 393; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Georgi, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beschreibung aller Nationen des russischen Reichs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 223; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> de Pauly, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description ethnographique des peuples de la Russie, peuples de la Sibérie orientale</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1862), <abbr>p.</abbr> 7; Krahmer, “Der Anadyr-Bezirk nach <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Olssufjew,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermann’s Mittheilungen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 230 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Bogoras, “The Chuckchee Religion,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Leyden and New York) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 487 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Crabouillet, “Les Lolos,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1873) <abbr>p.</abbr> 72; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Aston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Shinto</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 339; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, “Scapulimantia,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boas Anniversary Volume</i> (New York, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 143⁠–⁠165.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-725" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-726" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F.</abbr> Gordon Cumming, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In the Hebrides</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 226; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Guthrie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Old Scottish Customs</i> (London and Glasgow, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 223.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-726" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-727" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>1 Kings <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 7; Exodus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span> 25.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-727" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-728" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dionysius Halicarnasensis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antiquitates Romanae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 45, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 24; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Numa</i>, 9; Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span> 100.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-728" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-729" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acta Fratrum Arvalium</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Henzen, <abbr>p.</abbr> 132; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 603.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-729" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-730" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span> 100.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-730" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-731" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 364.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-731" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-732" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridgeway ingeniously suggests that the magical virtue of iron may be based on an observation of its magnetic power, which would lead savages to imagine that it was possessed of a spirit. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1903</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 816.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-732" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-733" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Frank Hatton, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North Borneo</i> (1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 233.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-733" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-734" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. E.</abbr> Pratt, “Two Journeys to Ta-tsien-lu on the eastern Borders of Tibet,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 341.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-734" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-735" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Svoboda, “Die Bewohner des Nikobaren-Archipels,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 13.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-735" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-736" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Captivity of Hans Stade of Hesse, in <abbr epub:type="se:era">AD</abbr> 1547⁠–⁠1555</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Tootal (London, 1874), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 85 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-736" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-737" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Fraser, “The Fish-skin Tartars,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the China Branch of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Asiatic Society for the Year 1891⁠–⁠92</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 15.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-737" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-738" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Kreutzwald und <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Neus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mythische und magische Lieder der Ehsten</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1854), <abbr>p.</abbr> 113.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-738" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-739" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Alexand. Guagninus, “De ducatu Samogitiae,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Respublica sive status regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae, Livoniae</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (Elzevir, 1627) <abbr>p.</abbr> 276; Johan. Lasicius, “De diis Samogitarum caeterorumque Sarmatum,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Respublica</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">ut supra</i>), <abbr>p.</abbr> 294 (<abbr>p.</abbr> 84, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magazin herausgegeben von der Lettisch⁠—Literärischen Gesellschaft</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-739" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-740" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> von Ende, “Die Baduwis von Java,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 10.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-740" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-741" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-741" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-742" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Guthrie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Old Scottish Customs</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 149; Ch. Rogers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Life in Scotland</i> (Edinburgh, 1884⁠–⁠1886), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 218.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-742" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-743" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion and Myth</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 91.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-743" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-744" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Gregor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland</i> (London, 1881), <abbr>p.</abbr> 201. The fishermen think that if the word “pig,” “sow,” or “swine” be uttered while the lines are being baited, the line will certainly be lost.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-744" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-745" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Leared, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Morocco and the Moors</i> (London, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 273.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-745" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-746" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Wickremasinghe, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Am Urquell</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1894) <abbr>p.</abbr> 7.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-746" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-747" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. F. D’Penha, “Superstitions and Customs in Salsette,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 114.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-747" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-748" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 431.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-748" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-749" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Jagor, “Bericht über verschiedene Volksstämme in Vorderindien,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1894) <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-749" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-750" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i> (Madras, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 341.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-750" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-751" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Gordon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Folk Tales</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 31.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-751" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-752" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. R. P.</abbr> Cadière, “Coutumes populaires de la vallée du Nguôn-So’n,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 354 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-752" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-753" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baudin, “Le Fétichisme,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 249; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 113.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-753" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-754" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Il Fetha Nagast o legislazione dei re, codice ecclesiastico e civile di Abissinia</i>, tradotto e annotato da Ignazio Guidi (Rome, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-754" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-755" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The reader may observe how closely the taboos laid upon mourners resemble those laid upon kings. From what has gone before, the reason of the resemblance is obvious.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-755" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-756" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 61, § 282.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-756" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-757" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. F. D’Penha, “Superstitions and Customs in Salsette,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-757" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-758" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Gregor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 206.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-758" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-759" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This is expressly said in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 202, § 846. On iron as a protective charm see also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Liebrecht, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gervasius von Tilbury</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 99 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zur Volkskunde</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 311; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Strackerjan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aberglaube und Sagen aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 354 <abbr>sq.</abbr> § 233; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,<sup>2</sup> § 414 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Culture</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 140; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Baumkultus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 132 note. Many peoples, especially in Africa, regard the smith’s craft with awe or fear as something uncanny and savouring of magic. Hence smiths are sometimes held in high honour, sometimes looked down upon with great contempt. These feelings probably spring in large measure from the superstitions which cluster round iron. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 153⁠–⁠159; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> McCall Theal, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Records of South-Eastern Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 447; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Lenz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Skizzen aus West-Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 184; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 217; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merkel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 110 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Masai</i> (Oxford, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 330 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 36 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i> (Berlin, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 776; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 40 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Ph. Paulitschke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die geistige Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 30; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographie Nordost-Afrikas, die materielle Cultur der Danâkil, Galla und Somâl</i> (Berlin, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 202; Th. Levebvre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage en Abyssinie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxi</span>.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Cecchi, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Da Zeila alle frontiere del Caffa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Rome, 1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 45; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Parkyns, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in Abyssinia</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1868), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 300 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Bent, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred City of the Ethiopians</i> (London, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 212; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Rohlf, “Reise durch Nord-Afrika,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermann’s Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 25 (Gotha, 1868), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30, 54; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Nachtigal, “Die Tibbu,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1870) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 312 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sahara und Sudan</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 443 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 145, 178, 371, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 189, 234 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The Kayans of Borneo think that a smith is inspired by a special spirit, the smith’s spirit, and that without this inspiration he could do no good work. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 198.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-759" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-760" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leipzig, 1866) <abbr>p.</abbr> 136.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-760" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-761" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 312. Compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 315, 364; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Dall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alaska and its Resources</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 146; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">American Naturalist</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 7; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yukon Territory</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 146.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-761" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-762" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg205">205</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-762" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-763" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Woldt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Captain Jacobsen’s Reise an der Nordwestküste Americas 1881⁠–⁠1883</i> (Leipzig, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 243.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-763" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-764" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das Jahr und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen Siebenbürgens</i> (Hermannstadt, 1866), <abbr>p.</abbr> 40; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 312.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-764" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-765" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Gray, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">China</i> (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 288.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-765" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-766" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jo. Meletius (Maeletius, Menecius), “De religione et sacrificiis veterum Borussorum,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Russorum Muscovitarum et Tartarorum religione, sacrificiis, nuptiarum, funerum ritu</i> (Spires, 1582), <abbr>p.</abbr> 263; <abbr>id.</abbr>, reprinted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scriptores rerum Livonicarum</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Riga and Leipzig, 1848) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 391 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, and in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mitteilungen der Litterarischen Gesellschaft Masovia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (Lötzen, 1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Chr. Hartknoch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alt und neues Preussen</i> (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1684), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 187 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-766" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-767" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 136.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-767" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-768" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tettau und Temme, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 285; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Mythologie</i>,<sup>4</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 454, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 441, 469; J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 198, § 1387.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-768" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-769" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Franz Vormann, “Zur Psychologie, Soziologie und Geschichte der Monumbo-Papua, Deutsch-Neuginea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 410.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-769" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-770" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">In Centraal Borneo</i> (Leyden, 1900), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 61; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 69.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-770" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-771" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i> (Berlin, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 184.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-771" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-772" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1045 (Leyden, 1897).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-772" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-773" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Romanae</i> 110; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15. 12. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 13.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-773" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-774" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grihya-Sutras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81, 141 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-774" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-775" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 53.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-775" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-776" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kubary, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die socialen Einrichtungen der Pelauer</i> (Berlin, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 126 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-776" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-777" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aus dem inneren und äussern Leben der Ehsten</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1876), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 448, 478.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-777" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-778" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Adair, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the American Indians</i> (London, 1775), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 134, 117. The Indians described by Adair are the Creek, Cherokee, and other tribes in the southeast of the United States.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-778" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-779" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice, “The Western Dénés, their Manners and Customs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Canadian Institute</i>, Third Series, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1888⁠–⁠89) <abbr>p.</abbr> 164.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-779" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-780" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Petitot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Monographie des Dènè-Dindjié</i> (Paris, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 76.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-780" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-781" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Schlömann, “Die Malepa in Transvaal,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i>, 1894, <abbr>p.</abbr> (67).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-781" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-782" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Leviticus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span> 10⁠–⁠14. The Hebrew word (נפש) translated “life” in the English version of verse 11 means also “soul” (marginal note in the Revised Version). Compare Deuteronomy <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 23⁠–⁠25.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-782" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-783" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 79; compare <abbr>id.</abbr> on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 67.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-783" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-784" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Wellhausen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reste arabischen Heidentumes</i> (Berlin, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 217.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-784" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-785" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 80⁠–⁠82.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-785" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-786" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Goudswaard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Papoewa’s van de Geelvinksbaai</i> (Schiedam, 1863), <abbr>p.</abbr> 77.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-786" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-787" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Hamilton’s “Account of the East Indies,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 469. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion of the Semites</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 369, note 1.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-787" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-788" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De la Loubere, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Du royaume de Siam</i> (Amsterdam, 1691), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 317.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-788" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-789" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pallegoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description du royaume Thai ou Siam</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 271, 365 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-789" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-790" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marco Polo, translated by <abbr>Col.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Yule (Second Edition, 1875), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 335.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-790" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-791" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Col.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Yule on Marco Polo, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-791" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-792" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Fytche, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Burma, Past and Present</i> (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 217 note. Compare <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-792" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-793" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 49.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-793" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-794" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baron’s “Description of the Kingdom of Tonqueen,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 691.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-794" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-795" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. E.</abbr> Bowdich, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mission from Cape Coast Castle to Ashantee</i> (London, 1873), <abbr>p.</abbr> 207.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-795" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-796" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 224, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 89.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-796" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-797" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i> (Amsterdam, 1686), <abbr>p.</abbr> 313.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-797" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-798" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Madagascar and its People</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 430.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-798" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-799" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 50.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-799" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-800" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. T.</abbr> Wilson and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. W.</abbr> Felkin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 200.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-800" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-801" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 67. There is an Arab legend of a king who was slain by opening the veins of his arms and letting the blood drain into a bowl; not a drop might fall on the ground, otherwise there would be blood revenge for it. Robertson Smith conjectured that the legend was based on an old form of sacrifice regularly applied to captive chiefs (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion of the Semites</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 369 note, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 418 note).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-801" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-802" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gottschling, “The Bawenda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-802" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-803" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marco Polo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 399, Yule’s translation, Second Edition.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-803" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-804" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir Walter Scott, note 2 to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peveril of the Peak</i>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-804" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-805" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charlotte Latham, “Some West Sussex Superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore Record</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 17.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-805" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-806" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 230; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 335; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 75 note.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-806" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-807" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the English Colony of New South Wales</i> (London, 1798), <abbr>p.</abbr> 580.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-807" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-808" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 224 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 110 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-808" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-809" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 256.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-809" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-810" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Edmund Spenser, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">View of the State of Ireland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 101 (reprinted in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Morley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ireland under Elizabeth and James the First</i>, London, 1890).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-810" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-811" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Futuna, or Horne Island and its People,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Polynesian Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 1 (April 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-811" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-812" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Max Radiguet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Derniers Sauvages</i> (Paris, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 175.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-812" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-813" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 53.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-813" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-814" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 795.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-814" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-815" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in West Africa</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 440, 447.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-815" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-816" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kropf, “Die religiösen Anschauungen der Kaffern,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i>, 1888, <abbr>p.</abbr> (46).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-816" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-817" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Nassau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fetichism in West Africa</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 83.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-817" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-818" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Guis, “Les <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nepu</i> ou Sorciers,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 370. See also <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 205.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-818" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-819" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 338, quoting <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, “Remarkable Ceremonial at the Decease and Burial of a Betsileo Prince,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual</i>, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 195 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-819" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-820" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Brun-Rollet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Nil Blanc et le Soudan</i> (Paris, 1855), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-820" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-821" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-821" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-822" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Emery, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 282.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-822" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-823" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Andersson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lake Ngami</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>p.</abbr> 224.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-823" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-824" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. New, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life, Wanderings, and Labours in Eastern Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 124; Francis Galton, “Domestication of Animals,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1865) <abbr>p.</abbr> 135. On the original sanctity of domestic animals see, above all, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religion of the Semites</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 280 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 295 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-824" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-825" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 796.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-825" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-826" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Linton Palmer, “A Visit to Easter Island,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Geographical Society</i>, xl. (1870) <abbr>p.</abbr> 171.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-826" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-827" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 129.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-827" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-828" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span> 1. 54, <abbr>p.</abbr> 710.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-828" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-829" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 194 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-829" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-830" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Romanae</i> 112; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15. 13. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 14.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-830" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-831" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18, 20.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-831" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-832" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion of the Semites</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 230.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-832" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-833" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i xml:lang="la">Dialis cotidie feriatus est</i>,” Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15. 16.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-833" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-834" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Isis et Osiris</i>, 6. A myth apparently akin to this has been preserved in some native Egyptian writings. See Ad. Erman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 364. Wine might not be taken into the temple at Heliopolis (Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Isis et Osiris</i>, 6). It was apparently forbidden to enter the temple at Delos after drinking wine (Dittenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sylloge Inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>No.</abbr> 564). When wine was offered to the Good Goddess at Rome it was not called wine but milk (Macrobius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturnalia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 12. 5; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Romanae</i> 20). It was a rule of Roman religion that wine might not be poured out in libations to the gods which had been made either from grapes trodden with bleeding feet or from the clusters of a vine beside which a human body had hung in a noose (Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> 119). This rule shows that wine was supposed to be defiled by blood or death.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-834" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-835" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bernardino de Sahagun, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</i>, traduite par Jourdanet et Siméon (Paris, 1880), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The native Mexican wine (<i>pulque</i>) is made from the sap of the great American aloe. See the note of the French translators of Sahagun, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 858 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Payne, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the New World called America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 374 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> The Chiquites Indians of Paraguay believed that the spirit of <i>chica</i>, or beer made from maize, could punish with sickness the person who was so irreverent or careless as to upset a vessel of the liquor. See Charlevoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire du Paraguay</i> (Paris, 1756), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 234.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-835" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-836" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 381 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-836" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-837" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 384 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-837" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-838" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i> (Melbourne and London, 1887), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 179.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-838" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-839" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. B.</abbr> Guppy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Solomon Islands and their Natives</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 41.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-839" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-840" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Cross, “On the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1854) <abbr>p.</abbr> 312.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-840" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-841" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 230.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-841" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-842" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For the reason, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 112 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 292; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tregear, “The Maoris of New Zealand,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 118.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-842" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-843" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Gillen, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the Horn Scientific Expedition to Central Australia</i>, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 182.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-843" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-844" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-844" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-845" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> James Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Booandik Tribe</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-845" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-846" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 450.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-846" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-847" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 139, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 209.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-847" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-848" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aus dem innern und äussern Leben der Ehsten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 475.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-848" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-849" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 447. Conversely among the central Australian tribes women are never allowed to witness the drawing of blood from men, which is often done for purposes of decoration; and when a quarrel has taken place and men’s blood has been spilt in the presence of women, it is usual for the man whose blood has been shed to perform a ceremony connected with his own or his father or mother’s totem. See Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 463.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-849" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-850" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 125 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-850" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-851" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Cross, “On the Karens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the American Oriental Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1854) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 311 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-851" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-852" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 256, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 71, 230, 235 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The spirit is called <i>kwun</i> by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 75 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>). See below, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg266">266</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-852" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-853" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 110. This passage was pointed out to me by the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Shuckburgh of Emmanuel College, Cambridge.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-853" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-854" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Romanae</i>, 100. Plutarch’s words (μάλιστα ῥύπτεσθαι τὰς κεφαλὰς καὶ καθαίρειν ἐπιτηδεύουσι) leave room to hope that the ladies did not strictly confine their ablutions to one day in the year.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-854" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-855" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> de Arriaga, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Extirpación de la Idolatria del Piru</i> (Lima, 1621), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28, 29.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-855" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-856" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 150; Sangermano, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description of the Burmese Empire</i> (Rangoon, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 131; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F. S.</abbr> Forbes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Burma</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 334; Shway Yoe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Burman</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 91.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-856" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-857" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 131.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-857" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-858" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Moura, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Royaume du Cambodge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 178, 388.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-858" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-859" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Duarte Barbosa, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in the beginning of the Sixteenth Century</i> (Hakluyt Society, 1866), <abbr>p.</abbr> 197.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-859" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-860" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This I learned in conversation with <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Roscoe and Miller, missionaries to Uganda. The system of totemism exists in full force in Uganda. No man will eat his totem animal or marry a woman of his own totem clan. Among the totems of the clans are the lion, leopard, elephant, antelope, mushroom, buffalo, sheep, grasshopper, crocodile, otter, beaver, and lizard. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 472 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-860" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-861" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>David Porter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of a Cruise made to the Pacific Ocean in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship"><abbr>U. S.</abbr> Frigate Essex</i></i> (New York, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 65.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-861" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-862" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vincendon-Dumoulin et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Desgraz <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Îles Marquises</i> (Paris, 1843), <abbr>p.</abbr> 262.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-862" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-863" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Matthias G⁠⸺, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lettres sur les Îles Marquises</i> (Paris, 1843), <abbr>p.</abbr> 50.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-863" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-864" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> von Langsdorff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise um die Welt</i> (London, 1812), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 115 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-864" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-865" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Max Radiguet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Derniers Sauvages</i> (Paris, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 156.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-865" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-866" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Capt.</abbr> James Cook, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 427 (London, 1809).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-866" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-867" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Jules Remy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ka Mooolelo Hawaii, Histoire de l’Archipel Havaiien</i> (Paris and Leipzig, 1862), <abbr>p.</abbr> 159.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-867" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-868" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1832⁠–⁠36), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 102.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-868" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-869" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</i> (London, 1799), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 354 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-869" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-870" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Colenso, “The Maori Races of New Zealand,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 43, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute</i>, 1868, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (separately paged).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-870" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-871" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">To Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 165. We have seen that under certain special circumstances common persons also are temporarily forbidden to touch their heads with their hands. See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg146">146</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg156">156</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg158">158</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg160">160</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg183">183</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-871" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-872" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-872" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-873" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Southern Districts of New Zealand</i> (London, 1851), <abbr>p.</abbr> 293; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 107 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-873" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-874" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dumont D’Urville, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse, exécuté sous son commandement sur la corvette <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Austrolabe</i>: histoire du voyage</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 534.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-874" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-875" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. A.</abbr> Cruise, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of a Ten Months’ Residence in New Zealand</i> (London, 1823), <abbr>p.</abbr> 187; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dumont D’Urville, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 533; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Southern Districts of New Zealand</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 30.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-875" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-876" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 187.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-876" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-877" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> France, “Customs of the Awuna Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 17 (October, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 39.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-877" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-878" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Agathias, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histories</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 3; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</i>,<sup>3</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Kauffmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Balder</i> (Strasburg, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 209 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The story of the Phrygian king Midas, who concealed the ears of an ass under his long hair (Aristophanes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Plutus</i>, 287; Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 146⁠–⁠193) may perhaps be a distorted reminiscence of a similar custom in Phrygia. Parallels to the story are recorded in modern Greece, Ireland, Brittany, Serbia, India, and among the Mongols. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Schmidt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Griechische Märchen, Sagen und Volkslieder</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 70 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 224 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Grimm’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Household Tales</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 498, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Hunt; Patrick Kennedy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Legendary Fictions of the Irish Celts</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> 1866); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Nore, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coutumes, mythes, et traditions des provinces de la France</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 219 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. S.</abbr> Karadschitsch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksmärchen der Serben</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 39, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 225 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 104, § 218; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Jülg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mongolische Märchen-Sammlung</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 22, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 182 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sagas from the Far East</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 21, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 206 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-878" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-879" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gregory of Tours, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire ecclésiastique des Francs</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 18, compare <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 24 (Guizot’s translation).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-879" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-880" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hahl, “Mitteilungen über Sitten und rechtliche Verhältnisse auf Ponape,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnologisches Notizblatt</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. Heft 2 (Berlin, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 6.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-880" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-881" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manuscrit Ramirez, Histoire de l’origine des Indiens qui habitent la Nouvelle Espagne</i> (Paris, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 171; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> de Acosta, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natural and Moral History of the Indies</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 365 (Hakluyt Society); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> de Herrera, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">General History of the vast Continent and Islands of America</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 216 (Stevens’s translation). The author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manuscrit Ramirez</i> speaks as if the rule applied only to the priests of the god Tezcatlipoca.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-881" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-882" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. M.</abbr> Dawson, “On the Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geological Survey of Canada, Report of Progress for 1878⁠–⁠79</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 123 <b>b</b>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-882" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-883" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 229.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-883" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-884" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-884" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-885" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21, 22, 143.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-885" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-886" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 68.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-886" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-887" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satapatha Brâhmana</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Eggeling, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 126, 128, with the translator’s note on <abbr>p.</abbr> 126 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-887" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-888" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. N.</abbr> Wilken, “Bijdragen tot de kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der Alfoeren in de Minahassa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1863) <abbr>p.</abbr> 126.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-888" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-889" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Ashe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Two Kings of Uganda</i> (London, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 109.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-889" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-890" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tenth Report on the North-Western Tribes of Canada</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 45 (separate reprint from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for 1895</i>).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-890" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-891" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 137.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-891" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-892" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 292 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-892" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-893" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 44.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-893" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-894" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Diodorus Siculus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 18.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-894" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-895" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Robertson Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kinship and Marriage in Early Arabia</i> (Cambridge, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 152 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-895" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-896" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Homer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iliad</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span> 141 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> This Homeric passage has been imitated by Valerius Flaccus (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Argonautica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 378). The Greeks often dedicated a lock of their hair to rivers. See Aeschylus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Choephori</i>, 5 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Philostratus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Heroica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span> 4; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 37. 3, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 20. 3, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 41. 3. The lock might be at the side or the back of the head or over the brow; it received a special name (Pollux, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 30).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-896" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-897" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. W.</abbr> Tromp, “Een Dajaksch Feest,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 38.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-897" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-898" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Arbousset et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Daumas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation d’un voyage d’exploration</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 565.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-898" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-899" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Porter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of a Cruise made to the Pacific Ocean</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 120.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-899" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-900" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tacitus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Germania</i>, 31. Vows of the same sort were occasionally made by the Romans (Suetonius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Julius</i>, 67; Tacitus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historiae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 61).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-900" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-901" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Paulus Diaconus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoira Langobardorum</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 7; Gregory of Tours, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire ecclésiastique des Francs</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 15, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 268 (Guizot’s translation, Nouvelle Edition, Paris, 1874).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-901" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-902" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 387.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-902" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-903" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Numbers <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 5.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-903" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-904" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A. E.</abbr> Köhler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbrauch</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">im Voigtlande</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 424; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Henderson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore of the Northern Counties</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 258, § 23; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</i>,<sup>2</sup> §§ 46, 72; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 208, § 45, <abbr>p.</abbr> 209 § 53; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Knoop, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volkssagen, Erzählungen</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 157, § 23; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Veckenstedt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wendische Sagen, Märchen und abergläubische Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 445; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Haltrich, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zur Volkskunde der Siebenbürger Sachsen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 313; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Krause, “Abergläubische Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-904" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-905" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 205, § 1092.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-905" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-906" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Gibbs, “Notes on the Tinneh or Chepewyan Indians of British and Russian America,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution</i>, 1866, <abbr>p.</abbr> 305; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Dall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alaska and its Resources</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 202. The reason alleged by the Indians is that if the girls’ nails were cut sooner the girls would be lazy and unable to embroider in porcupine quill-work. But this is probably a late invention like the reasons assigned in Europe for the similar custom, of which the commonest is that the child would become a thief if its nails were cut.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-906" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-907" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 30.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-907" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-908" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Herold, “Religiöse Anschauungen und Gebräuche der deutschen Ewe-Neger,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen aus den Deutschen Schutzgebieten</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 148 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-908" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-909" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. J.</abbr> Curtiss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Semitic Religion To-day</i> (Chicago, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr>153.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-909" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-910" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruyt, “Het koppensnellen der Toradja’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der konink. Akademie van Wetenschapen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 198 n<sup>2</sup> (Amsterdam, 1899).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-910" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-911" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Römer, “Bijdrage tot de Geneeskunst der Karo-Batak’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1908) <abbr>p.</abbr> 216.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-911" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-912" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Knoop, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volkssagen, Erzählungen, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, aus dem östlichen Hinterpommern</i> (Posen, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 157, § 23.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-912" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-913" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 209, § 57.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-913" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-914" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison, in a letter to the author, dated August 26, 1898.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-914" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-915" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>From the report of a lecture delivered in Melbourne, December 9, 1898, by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Worrall, of Fiji, missionary. The newspaper cutting from which the above extract is quoted was sent to me by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Lorimer Fison in a letter, dated Melbourne, January 9, 1899. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fison omitted to give the name and date of the newspaper.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-915" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-916" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1870), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 206 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-916" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-917" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Richard <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Cruise, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of a Ten Months’ Residence in New Zealand</i> (London, 1823), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 283 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dumont D’Urville, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage autour du monde et à la recherche de La Pérouse: histoire du voyage</i> (Paris, 1832), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 533.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-917" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-918" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 108 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <abbr>loc. cit.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-918" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-919" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 90 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-919" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-920" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Moura, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Royaume du Cambodge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 226 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-920" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-921" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg003">3</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-921" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-922" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg252">252</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-922" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-923" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 67⁠–⁠84. I have abridged the account of the ceremonies by omitting some details. For an account of the ceremonies observed at cutting the hair of a young Siamese prince, at the age of thirteen or fourteen, see Mgr. Bruguière, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de l’Association de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1831) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 197 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-923" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-924" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The aboriginal tribes of Central Australia form an exception to this rule; for among them no attempt is made to injure a person by performing magical ceremonies over his shorn hair. See Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 478.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-924" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-925" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 52⁠–⁠54, 174 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-925" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-926" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Martin, “Über die Eingeborenen von Chiloe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1877) <abbr>p.</abbr> 177.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-926" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-927" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vincendon-Dumoulin et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Desgraz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Îles Marquises</i> (Paris, 1843), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 247 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-927" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-928" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Porter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of a Cruise made to the Pacific Ocean</i><sup>2</sup> (New York, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 188.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-928" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-929" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Taylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Te Ika a Maui, or New Zealand and its Inhabitants</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 203 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. S.</abbr> Thomson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Story of New Zealand</i> (London, 1859), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 116 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-929" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-930" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 468 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-930" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-931" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-931" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-932" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On Australian Medicine-men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 27. Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 360 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-932" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-933" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Palmer, “Notes on some Australian Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 293.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-933" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-934" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dialogi meretricii</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 4 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-934" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-935" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Apuleius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 16 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> For more evidence of the same sort, see Th. Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 248; James Bonwick, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Daily Life of the Tasmanians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 178; James Chalmers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pioneering in New Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 187; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S.</abbr> Polack, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners and Customs of the New Zealanders</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 282; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 270; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. H.</abbr> von Langsdorff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise um die Welt</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 134 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 364; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ewe-speaking peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 99; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 203; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> von den Steinen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unter den Naturvölkern Zentral-Brasiliens</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 343; Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 447; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</i>,<sup>2</sup> § 178; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, Neue Folge, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 12 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. S.</abbr> Hartland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Legend of Perseus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 64⁠–⁠74, 132⁠–⁠139.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-935" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-936" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Neue Beiträge zur Ethnologie und Volkeskunde der Huzulen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 94.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-936" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-937" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 509; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Birlinger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 493; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 258; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A. E.</abbr> Köhler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbrauch</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">im Voigtlande</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 425; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Witzschel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 282; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> § 180; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 224, § 273. A similar belief prevails among the gypsies of Eastern Europe (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> von Wlislocki, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Zigeuner</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 81).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-937" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-938" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> § 181.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-938" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-939" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charlotte Latham, “Some West Sussex Superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore Record</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 40.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-939" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-940" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 237.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-940" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-941" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Todas</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 268 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-941" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-942" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> §§ 176, 179.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-942" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-943" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Krause, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Tlinkit-Indianer</i> (Jena, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 300.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-943" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-944" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Petronius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satyrica</i> 104.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-944" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-945" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 236 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-945" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-946" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 231 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ein Besuch in San Salvador</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 117 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-946" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-947" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. B.</abbr> du Chaillu, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa</i> (London, 1861), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 426 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-947" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-948" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Baumann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Usambara und seine Nachbargebiete</i> (Berlin, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 141.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-948" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-949" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Junod, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Ba-Ronga</i> (Neuchâtel, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 398⁠–⁠400.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-949" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-950" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stanbridge, “On the Aborigines of Victoria,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 300.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-950" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-951" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30, 74 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-951" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-952" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. A.</abbr> Jaussen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coutumes des Arabes au pays de Moab</i> (Paris, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-952" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-953" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>2 Samuel, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 4.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-953" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-954" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>2 Samuel, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 26⁠–⁠31.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-954" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-955" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Torday and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. A.</abbr> Joyce, “Notes on the Ethnography of the Ba-Yaka,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 49.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-955" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-956" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>François Pyrard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages to the East Indies, the Maldives, the Moluccas, and Brazil</i>, translated by Albert Gray (Hakluyt Society, 1887), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 110 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-956" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-957" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Shortland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Traditions and Superstitions of the New Zealanders</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 110.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-957" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-958" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S.</abbr> Polack, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners and Customs of the New Zealanders</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 38 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 108 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-958" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-959" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</i> (London, 1799), <abbr>p.</abbr> 355.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-959" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-960" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. A.</abbr> Freeman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels and Life in Ashanti and Jaman</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 171 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-960" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-961" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 79.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-961" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-962" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15. 15. The ancients were not agreed as to the distinction between lucky and unlucky trees. According to Cato and Pliny, trees that bore fruit were lucky, and trees which did not were unlucky (Festus, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Felices</i>; Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 108); but according to Tarquitius Priscus those trees were unlucky which were sacred to the infernal gods and bore black berries or black fruit (Macrobius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturn</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 16, but <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 20 in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Jan’s edition, Quedlinburg and Leipzig, 1852).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-962" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-963" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span> 235; Festu, <abbr>p.</abbr> 57 <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Capillatam vel capillarem arborem</i>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-963" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-964" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Quedenfelt, “Aberglaube und halbreligiöse Bruderschaft bei den Marokkanern,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i>, 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> (680).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-964" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-965" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 294 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, § 464.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-965" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-966" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Germanische Mythen</i> (Berlin, 1858), <abbr>p.</abbr> 630.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-966" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-967" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Henderson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore of the Northern Counties</i> (London, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 17.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-967" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-968" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 74.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-968" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-969" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 265.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-969" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-970" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Heijmering, “Zeden en gewoonten op het eiland Rottie,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1843, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 634⁠–⁠637.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-970" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-971" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Dall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Alaska and its Resources</i> (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 54; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Whymper, “The Natives of the Youkon River,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 174.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-971" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-972" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Meier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 509; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Birlinger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 493.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-972" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-973" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mannhardt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Germanische Mythen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 630.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-973" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-974" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. B.</abbr> Guppy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Solomon Islands and their Natives</i> (London, 1887), <abbr>p.</abbr> 54.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-974" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-975" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 203.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-975" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-976" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fiji and the Fijians</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 249.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-976" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-977" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Scott and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. P.</abbr> Hardiman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 37.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-977" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-978" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Zend-Avesta, Vendîdâd</i> Fargaard, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 186 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Darmesteter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-978" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-979" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grihya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 57; compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 303, 399, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 62 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sacred Books of the East</i>, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.). Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 487.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-979" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-980" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grihya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 218.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-980" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-981" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. W.</abbr> Felkin, “Notes on the Madi or Moru Tribe of Central Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1882⁠–⁠84) <abbr>p.</abbr> 332.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-981" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-982" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 185 note. The same thing was told me in conversation by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, missionary to Uganda; but I understood him to mean that the hair was not carelessly disposed of, but thrown away in some place where it would not easily be found.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-982" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-983" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 516 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-983" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-984" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Light in Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 209; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions and Religions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-984" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-985" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Steedman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wanderings and Adventures in the Interior of Southern Africa</i> (London, 1835), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 266.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-985" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-986" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Emin Pasha in Central Africa, being a Collection of his Letters and Journals</i> (London, 1888), <abbr>p.</abbr> 74.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-986" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-987" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 625.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-987" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-988" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merkel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 243.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-988" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-989" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Western Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 215.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-989" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-990" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Partridge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cross River Natives</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8, 203 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-990" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-991" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>James Teit, “The Thompson River Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 360.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-991" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-992" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. P.</abbr> Wilken en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Schwarz, “Allerlei over het land en volk van Bolaäng Mongondou,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1867) <abbr>p.</abbr> 322.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-992" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-993" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</i><sup>2</sup> (Innsbruck, 1871), §§ 176, 580; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mélusine</i>, 1878, col. 79; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Monseur, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Folklore Wallon</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 91.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-993" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-994" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 35; Theophrastus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Characters</i>, “The Superstitious Man”; Theocritus, <abbr>id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 39, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 127; Persius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 31 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> At the siege of Danzig in 1734, when the old wives saw a bomb coming, they used to spit thrice and cry, “Fi, ti, fi, there comes the dragon!” in the persuasion that this secured them against being hit (Tettau und Temme, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i> (Berlin, 1837), <abbr>p.</abbr> 284). For more examples, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E. B.</abbr> Mayor on Juvenal, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 112; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Crombie, “The Saliva Superstition,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">International Folk-lore Congress</i>, 1891, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Papers and Transactions</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249 sq.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> de Mensignac, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recherches ethnographiques sur la salive et le crachat</i> (Bordeaux, 1892), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. W.</abbr> Nicolson, “The Saliva Superstition in Classical Literature,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Harvard Studies in Classical Philology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 35 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-994" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-995" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Garcilasso de la Vega, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">First Part of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</i>, bk. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> ch. 7 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 127, Markham’s translation).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-995" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-996" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mélusine</i>, 1878, coll. 583 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-996" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-997" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The People of Turkey</i>, by a Consul’s daughter and wife, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 250.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-997" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-998" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der armenische Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-998" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-999" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Abbott, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Macedonian Folklore</i> (Cambridge, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 214.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-999" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1000" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Quedenfelt, “Aberglaube und halbreligiöse Bruderschaft bei den Marokkanern,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i>, 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> (680).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1000" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1001" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. A.</abbr> Jaussen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coutumes des Arabes au pays de Moab</i> (Paris, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 94 note <sup>1</sup>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1001" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1002" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 139; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. J.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aus dem innern und äussern Leben der Ehsten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 491.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1002" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1003" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Sauvé, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</i> (Paris, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 41.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1003" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1004" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. H.</abbr> Singleton, in a letter to me, dated Rathmoyle House, Abbeyleix, Ireland, 24th February 1904.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1004" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1005" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Antoine Petit, in Th. Lefebvre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage en Abyssinie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 373.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1005" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1006" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 342 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Leyden, 1892).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1006" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1007" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. W.</abbr> Felkin, “Notes on the For Tribe of Central Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884⁠–⁠86) <abbr>p.</abbr> 230.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1007" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1008" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. D’Orbigny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage dans l’Amérique méridionale</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 93; <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Musters, “On the Races of Patagonia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1872) <abbr>p.</abbr> 197; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 36. The Patagonians sometimes throw their hair into a river instead of burning it.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1008" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1009" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Sauvé, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 170.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1009" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1010" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Z.</abbr> Zanetti, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Medicina delle nostre donne</i> (Città di Castello, 1892), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 234 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1010" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1011" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 99; Miss Mary <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Kingsley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in West Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 447; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Nassau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fetichism in West Africa</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 83; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. F.</abbr> Mockler-Ferryman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Nigeria</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 286; David Livingstone, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of Expedition to the Zambesi</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 365. In some parts of New Guinea cut hair is destroyed for the same reason (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Romilly, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">From my Verandah in New Guinea</i>, London, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 83).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1011" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1012" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Island of Stone Money, Uap of the Carolines</i> (Philadelphia and London, 1910), <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> 137.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1012" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1013" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 451.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1013" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1014" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin <abbr>No.</abbr> 5</i> (Brisbane, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 21.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1014" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1015" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Fitzroy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Surveying Voyages of His Majesty’s Ships Adventure and Beagle</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (London, 1839). <abbr>pp.</abbr> 313 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1015" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1016" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 360.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1016" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1017" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</i><sup>2</sup> (Innsbruck, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 28, §§ 177, 179, 180.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1017" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1018" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">U.</abbr> Jahn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hexenwesen und Zauberei in Pommern</i> (Breslau, 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 15; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mélusine</i>, 1878, col. 79; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Monseur, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Folklore Wallon</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 91.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1018" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1019" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Meyer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indogermanische Mythen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Achilleis</i> (Berlin, 1877), <abbr>p.</abbr> 523.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1019" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1020" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Lowell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chosön, the Land of the Morning Calm, a Sketch of Korea</i> (London, Preface dated 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 199⁠–⁠201; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bishop, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Korea and her Neighbours</i> (London, 1898), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 55 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1020" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1021" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg276">276</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1021" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1022" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg004">4</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg131">131</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg139">139</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg145">145</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg156">156</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1022" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1023" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ridley, “Report on Australian Languages and Traditions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1873) <abbr>p.</abbr> 268.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1023" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1024" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Stuhlmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mit Emin Pascha ins Herz von Afrika</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 795.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1024" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1025" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> de Castelnau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Expédition dans les parties centrales de l’Amérique du Sud</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Paris, 1851) <abbr>p.</abbr> 46.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1025" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1026" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 34.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1026" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1027" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Über das Haaropfer und einige andere Trauergebräuche bei den Völkern Indonesiens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> (reprinted from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue Coloniale Internationale</i>, Amsterdam, 1886⁠–⁠87); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ploss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Das Kind in Brauch und Sitte der Völker</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 289 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Potkanski, “Die Ceremonie der Haarschur bei den Slaven und Germanen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anzeiger der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Krakau</i>, May 1896, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 232⁠–⁠251.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1027" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1028" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg261">261</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1028" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1029" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg111">111</a> <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1029" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1030" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</i> (London, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 205.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1030" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1031" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Religion des Veda</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 426 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1031" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1032" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Alfred Maury, “Les Populations primitives du nord de l’Hindoustan,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IVme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1854) <abbr>p.</abbr> 197.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1032" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1033" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De dea Syria</i>, 53.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1033" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1034" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 160.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1034" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1035" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore in Borneo</i> (Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899; privately printed), <abbr>p.</abbr> 28.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1035" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1036" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Gutmann, “Trauer und Begräbnissitten der Wadschagga,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxix</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1036" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1037" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Werner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natives of British Central Africa</i> (London, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165, 166, 167.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1037" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1038" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M.</abbr> Hildebrandt, “Ethnographische Notizen über Wakamba und ihre Nachbarn,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 395. Children who are born in an unusual position, the second born of twins, and children whose upper teeth appear before the lower, are similarly exposed by the Akikuyu. The mother is regarded as unclean, not so much because she has exposed, as because she has given birth to such a child.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1038" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1039" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Monier Williams, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religious Thought and Life in India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 375.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1039" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1040" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span> 2. 3, <abbr>p.</abbr> 535; Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 34. 3. In two paintings on Greek vases we see Apollo in his character of the purifier preparing to cut off the hair of Orestes. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Monumenti inediti</i>, 1847, <abbr>pl.</abbr> 48; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annali dell’ Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica</i>, 1847, <abbr>pl.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>.; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archaeologische Zeitung</i>, 1860, pll. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">cxxxvii</span> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">cxxxviii</span>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Stephani, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Compte rendu de la Commission archéologique</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg), 1863, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 271 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1040" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1041" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Martin, “Über die Eingeborenen von Chiloe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1877) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 177 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1041" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1042" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1891), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 392 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1042" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1043" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. J.</abbr> van Dinter, “Eenige geographische en ethnographische aanteekeningen betreffende het eiland Siaoe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 381.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1043" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1044" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On Australian Medicine-men,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 27; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-east Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 365.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1044" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1045" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Dieffenbach, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in New Zealand</i> (London, 1843), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 59.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1045" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1046" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Light in Africa</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 209; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1046" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1047" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> le Gobin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire des Isles Marianes</i> (Paris, 1700), <abbr>p.</abbr> 52. The writer confesses his ignorance of the reason of the custom.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1047" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1048" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> de Mensignac, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recherches ethnographiques sur la salive et le crachat</i> (Bordeaux, 1892), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1048" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1049" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vahness, reported by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> von Luschan, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte</i>, 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> (416).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1049" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1050" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Komm herüber und hilf uns!</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Barmen, 1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 9 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1050" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1051" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 83 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1051" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1052" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 365.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1052" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1053" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 99.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1053" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1054" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Partridge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cross River Natives</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>p.</abbr> 8.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1054" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1055" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Raffenel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage dans l’Afrique occidentale</i> (Paris, 1846), <abbr>p.</abbr> 338.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1055" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1056" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> de Mensignac, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 48.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1056" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1057" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mission Evangelica al reyno de Congo por la serafica religion de los Capuchinos</i> (Madrid, 1649), <abbr>p.</abbr> 70 verso.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1057" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1058" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, Neue Folge (Leipzig, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 13.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1058" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1059" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. W.</abbr> Christian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Caroline Islands</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 289 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1059" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1060" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>.<sup>2</sup> (London, 1822) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 127, 138.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1060" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1061" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Raum, “Blut und Speichelbünde bei den Wadschagga,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1907) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 290 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1061" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1062" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg013">13</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1062" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1063" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Porphyry, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De abstinentia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 18.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1063" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1064" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 170. The blood may perhaps be drunk by them as a medium of inspiration. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Magic Art and the Evolution of Kings</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 381 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1064" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1065" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Dapper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description de l’Afrique</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 336.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1065" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1066" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Hutchinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Impressions of Western Africa</i> (London, 1858), <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1066" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1067" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 21.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1067" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1068" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 526 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, from information furnished by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1068" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1069" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Watt (quoting <abbr>Col.</abbr> W. J. M’Culloch), “The Aboriginal Tribes of Manipur,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 360.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1069" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1070" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The Native Tribes of Manipur,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1070" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1071" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 317 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; (Sir) <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Scott and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. P.</abbr> Hardiman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gazetteer of Upper Burma and the Shan States</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1071" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1072" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Die Pschawen und Chewsuren im Kaukasus,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für allgemeine Erdkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1857) <abbr>p.</abbr> 76.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1072" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1073" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Senfft, “Ethnographische Beiträge über die Karolineninsel Yap,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermanns Mitteilungen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 54. In Gall, another village of the same island, the people grow bananas for sale, but will not eat them themselves, fearing that if they did so the women of the village would be barren (<abbr>ibid.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1073" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1074" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15. 6 and 9. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> 13.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1074" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1075" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 87 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1075" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1076" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Hillner, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksthümlicher Brauch und Glaube bei Geburt und Taufe im Siebenbürger Sachsenlande</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 15. This tractate (of which I possess a copy) appears to be a programme of the High School (<i xml:lang="de">Gymnasium</i>) at Schässburg in Transylvania for the school year 1876⁠–⁠1877.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1076" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1077" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Lapponibus Finmarchiac eorumque lingua, vita, et religione pristina commentatio</i> (Copenhagen, 1767), <abbr>p.</abbr> 494.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1077" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1078" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Altindisches Zauberritual</i> (Amsterdam, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 108.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1078" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1079" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 518.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1079" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1080" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kreemer, “Hoe de Javaan zijne zieken verzorgt,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 114; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Plechtigheden en gebruiken uit den cyclus van het familienleven der volken van den Indischen Archipel,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 586.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1080" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1081" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ling Roth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Natives of Sarawak and British North Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 98.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1081" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1082" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in the Forests of the Far East</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 170.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1082" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1083" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, “Alte Gebräuche bei Heirathen, Geburt und Sterbefällen bei dem Toumbuluh-Stamm in der Minahasa (Nord Selebes),” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 95 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1083" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1084" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 606 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1084" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1085" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 692.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1085" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1086" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 433 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1086" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1087" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A. E.</abbr> Köhler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbrauch, Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte Überlieferungen im Voigtlande</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 435 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 355, § 574.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1087" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1088" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 37. note 1.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1088" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1089" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 56, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1089" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1090" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>G. F. D’Penha, “Superstitions and Customs in Salsette,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1090" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1091" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ris, “De onderafdeeling Klein Mandailing Oeloe en Pahantan en hare Bevolking,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 503. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbeschrijving van Midden Sumatra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1091" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1092" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Meerwaldt, “Gebruiken der Bataks in het maatschappelijk leven,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 117.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1092" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1093" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>H. K[ern], “Bijgeloof onder de inlanders in den Oosthoek van Java,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1880) 310; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Kreemer, “Hoe de Javaan zijne zieken verzorgt,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 120, 124; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Louwerier, “Bijgeloovige gebruiken, die door de Javanen worden in acht genomen bij de verzorging en opvoeding hunner kinderen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 253.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1093" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1094" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A. W. P. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Pistorius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Studien over de inlandsche huishouding in de Padangsche Bovenlanden</i> (Zalt-Bommel, 1871), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i> (Leyden, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 266; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i> (the Hague, 1886), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 135, 207, 325.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1094" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1095" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. Bérengier, “Croyances superstitieuses dans le pays de Chittagong,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1881) <abbr>p.</abbr> 515.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1095" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1096" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Damien Grangeon, “Les Chams et leurs superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 93.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1096" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1097" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. A.</abbr> Perera, “Glimpses of Singhalese Social Life,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 378.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1097" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1098" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Pilsudski, “Schwangerschaft, Entbindung und Fehlgeburt bei den Bewohnern der Insel Sachalin,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 759.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1098" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1099" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Gordon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Folk Tales</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 39.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1099" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1100" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Campbell Thompson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Semitic Magic</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>p.</abbr> 169.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1100" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1101" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 59. Compare Hippocrates, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De morbo sacro</i>, μηδὲ πόδα ἐπὶ ποδὶ ἔχειν, μηδὲ χεῖρα ἐπὶ χειρί; ταῦτα γὰρ πάντα κωλύματα εἶναι (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 589, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Kühn, Leipzig, 1825, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Rohde, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Psyche</i>,<sup>3</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 76 note <sup>1</sup>).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1101" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1102" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 285 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Antoninus Liberalis, quoting Nicander, says it was the Fates and Ilithyia who impeded the birth of Hercules, but though he says they clasped their hands, he does not say that they crossed their legs (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transformations</i> 29). Compare Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span> 11. 3.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1102" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1103" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Strausz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Bulgaren</i> (Leipzig, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 293.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1103" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1104" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Panzer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 303.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1104" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1105" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Mythologie</i>,<sup>4</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 897, 983; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Brand, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 299; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 302, 306 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Souché, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Croyances, présages et traditions diverses</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 16; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 567.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1105" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1106" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">ll.cc.</i><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1106" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1107" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Th. Bisset, in Sir John Sinclair’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Statistical Account of Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Edinburgh, 1793) <abbr>p.</abbr> 83. In his account of the second tour which he made in Scotland in the summer of 1772, Pennant says that “the precaution of loosening every knot about the new-joined pair is strictly observed” (Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 382). He is here speaking particularly of the Perthshire Highlands.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1107" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1108" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pennant, “Tour in Scotland,” Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 91. However, at a marriage in the island of Skye, the same traveller observed that “the bridegroom put all the powers of magic to defiance, for he was married with both shoes tied with their latchet” (Pennant, “Second Tour in Scotland,” Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 325). According to another writer the shoe-tie of the bridegroom’s <em>right</em> foot was unloosed at the church-door (Ch. Rogers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Life in Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 232).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1108" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1109" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Eijüb Abēla, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss abergläubischer Gebräuche in Syrien,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift des deutschen Palaestina-Vereins</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1884) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 91 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1109" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1110" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Georgeakis et Pineau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore de Lesbos</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 344 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1110" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1111" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du Nord</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 288⁠–⁠292.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1111" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1112" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Eenige mededeelingen betreffende Rote door een inlandischen Schoolmeester,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 554; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Graafland, “Eenige aanteekeningen op ethnographisch gebied ten aanzien van het eiland Rote,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 373 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1112" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1113" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 533.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1113" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1114" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Jastrow, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religion of Babylonia and Assyria</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 268, 270.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1114" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1115" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1115" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1116" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Al Baidawī’s Commentary on the Koran</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> 113, verse 4. I have to thank my friend <abbr>Prof.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. A.</abbr> Bevan for indicating this passage to me, and furnishing me with a translation of it.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1116" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1117" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Palmer, “Notes on some Australian Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 293. The Tahitians ascribed certain painful illnesses to the twisting and knotting of their insides by demons (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 363).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1117" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1118" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 48.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1118" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1119" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Fossey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Magie assyrienne</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 83 sq.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Campbell Thompson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Semitic Magic</i> (London, 1908), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 164 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1119" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1120" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Campbell Thompson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Semitic Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1120" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1121" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>E. O’Donovan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Merv Oasis</i> (London, 1882), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 319.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1121" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1122" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stämme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 531.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1122" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1123" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Maclagan, M.D., “Notes on Folklore Objects collected in Argyleshire,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 154⁠–⁠156. In the northwest of Ireland divination by means of a knotted thread is practised in order to discover whether a sick beast will recover or die. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">International Folk-lore Congress</i>, 1891, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Papers and Transactions</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 391 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1123" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1124" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Chambers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Rhymes of Scotland</i>, New Edition, <abbr>p.</abbr> 349. Grimm has shown that the words of this charm are a very ancient spell for curing a lame horse, a spell based on an incident in the myth of the old Norse god Balder, whose foal put its foot out of joint and was healed by the great master of spells, the god Woden. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Grimm, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Deutsche Mythologie</i>,<sup>4</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 185, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 1030 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Christ has been substituted for Balder in the more modern forms of the charm both in Scotland and Germany.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1124" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1125" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 279.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1125" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1126" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eclogae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 78⁠–⁠80. Highland sorcerers also used three threads of different colours with three knots tied on each thread. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1126" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1127" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Wellhausen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reste arabischen Heidentums</i><sup>2</sup> (Berlin, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 163.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1127" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1128" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 263.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1128" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1129" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Velten, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten und Gebräuche der Suaheli</i> (Göttingen, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 317.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1129" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1130" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>David Leslie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</i> (Edinburgh, 1875), <abbr>p.</abbr> 147.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1130" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1131" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gríhya-Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 432, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 127 (Sacred Books of the East, <abbr>vols.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1131" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1132" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Shooter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country</i> (London, 1857), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 217 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1132" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1133" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes sur le Laos</i> (Saigon, 1885), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1133" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1134" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vetter, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mitteilungen der geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 95.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1134" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1135" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R. S.</abbr> Ralston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Songs of the Russian People</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 388⁠–⁠390.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1135" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1136" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 577 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warde Fowler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roman Festivals of the Period of the Republic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 309 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1136" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1137" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geoponica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 14.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1137" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1138" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der armenische Volksglaube</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 115.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1138" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1139" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Abeghian, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 91.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1139" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1140" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Titelbach, “Das heilige Feuer bei den Balkanslaven,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 3.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1140" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1141" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Heinrich, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Agrarische Sitten und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen Siebenbürgens</i> (Hermannstadt, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 9.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1141" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1142" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. J. R.</abbr> Le Mesurier, “Customs and Superstitions connected with the Cultivation of Rice in the Southern Province of Ceylon,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 371.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1142" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1143" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Dalyell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Darker Superstitions of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 307.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1143" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1144" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Brand, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Antiquities</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 231 (Bohn’s edition); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Hunt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Romances of the West of England</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 379; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. F.</abbr> Thiselton Dyer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Folk-lore</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 229 <abbr>sq.</abbr> On the other hand the Karaits, a Jewish sect in the Crimea, lock all cupboards when a person is in the last agony, lest their contents should be polluted by the contagion of death. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Weissenberg, “Die Karäer der Krim,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxiv</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 143.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1144" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1145" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Extract from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Times</i> of 4th September 1863, quoted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1908) <abbr>p.</abbr> 336.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1145" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1146" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 98.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1146" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1147" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Runge, “Volksglaube in der Schweiz,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für deutsche Mythologie und Sittenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1859) <abbr>p.</abbr> 178, § 25. The belief is reported from Zurich.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1147" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1148" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 174; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 241.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1148" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1149" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Gerard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Land beyond the Forest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 208.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1149" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1150" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, “Volksüberlieferungen der Pidhireane,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxiii</span>. (1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 251.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1150" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1151" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 89 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The tying and untying of magic knots was forbidden by the Coptic church, but we are not told the purposes for which the knots were used. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Il Fetha Nagast o legislazione dei re, codice ecclesiastico e civile di Abissinia</i>, tradotto e annotato da Ignazio Guidi (Rome, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 140.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1151" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1152" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For examples see Horace, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 8, 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 370, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 509; Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Metamorphoses</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 182 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Tibullus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 3. 29⁠–⁠32; Petronius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satyrica</i> 44; Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 3. 3; Columella, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De re rustica</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 357⁠–⁠362; Athenaeus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 28, <abbr>p.</abbr> 198 <b>e</b>; Dittenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,<sup>2</sup> Nos. 653 (lines 23 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) and 939; Ch. Michel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recueil d’inscriptions grecques</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 694. Compare Servius on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 518, “<i xml:lang="la">In sacris nihil solet esse religatum.</i>”<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1152" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1153" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 257 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1153" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1154" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Thucydides, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 22.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1154" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1155" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Scholia on Pindar, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pythian</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 133.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1155" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1156" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 689 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1156" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1157" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pindar, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pythian</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 129 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>: Apollonius Rhodius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Argonautica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 5 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; Apollodorus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 9. 16.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1157" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1158" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Artemidorus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oneirocritica</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 63. At Chemmis in Upper Egypt there was a temple of Perseus, and the people said that from time to time Perseus appeared to them and they found his great sandal, two cubits long, which was a sign of prosperity for the whole land of Egypt. See Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 91.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1158" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1159" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Gazette archéologique</i>, 1884, plates 44, 45, 46 with the remarks of De Witte and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Lenormant, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 352 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The skin on which the man is crouching is probably the so-called “fleece of Zeus” (Διὸς κώδιον), as to which see Hesychius and Suidas, <abbr>s. v.</abbr>; Polemo, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Preller, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 140⁠–⁠142; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. A.</abbr> Lobeck, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aglaophamus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 183 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> Compare my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 31. 8.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1159" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1160" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 517 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1160" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1161" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I.</abbr> Goldziher, “Der Dîwân des Garwal b. Aus Al-Hutej’ a,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 5.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1161" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1162" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See Servius, on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 370: “<i xml:lang="la">In ratione sacrorum par est et animae et corporis causa: nam plerumque quae non possunt circa animam fieri fiunt circa corpus, ut solvere vel ligare, quo possit anima, quod per se non potest, ex cognatione sentire.</i>”<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1162" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1163" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Livy, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 18. 7.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1163" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1164" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“<i xml:lang="la">UNUM EXUTA PEDEM quia id agitur, ut et ista solvatur et implicetur Aeneas</i>,” Servius, on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 518.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1164" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1165" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“On a Far-off Island,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Blackwood’s Magazine</i>, February 1886, <abbr>p.</abbr> 238.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1165" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1166" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Clement of Alexandria, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Stromateis</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 5. 28, <abbr>p.</abbr> 662, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Potter; Jamblichus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adhortatio ad philosophiam</i>, 23; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De educatione puerorum</i>, 17. According to others, all that Pythagoras forbade was the wearing of a ring on which the likeness of a god was engraved (Diogenes Laertius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 1. 17; Porphyry, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vita Pythagorae</i> 42; Suidas, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> Πυθαγόρας); according to Julian a ring was only forbidden if it bore the names of the gods (Julian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orations</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 236 <b>d</b>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 306 <abbr>ed.</abbr> Dindorf). I have shown elsewhere that the maxims or symbols of Pythagoras, as they were called, are in great measure merely popular superstitions (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 147 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1166" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1167" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This we learn from an inscription found on the site. See Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική, Athens, 1898, col. 249; Dittenberger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sylloge inscriptionum Graecarum</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>No.</abbr> 939.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1167" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1168" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasti</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 657 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1168" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1169" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">I. V.</abbr> Zingerle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler Volkes</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>p.</abbr> 3.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1169" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1170" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Scheffer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lapponia</i> (Frankfurt, 1673), <abbr>p.</abbr> 313.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1170" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1171" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Huzulen</i> (Vienna, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 89; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Viehzucht und Viehzauber in den Ostkarpaten,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 386.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1171" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1172" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 13, 16.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1172" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1173" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 143.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1173" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1174" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 200 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 202; compare, <abbr>id.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 250.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1174" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1175" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg267">267</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1175" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1176" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg032">32</a>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg051">51</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1176" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1177" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg031">31</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1177" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1178" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De la Borde, “Relation de l’origine, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, des Caraibes sauvages,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 15, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recueil de divers voyages faits en Afrique et en l’Amérique</i> (Paris, 1684).<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1178" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1179" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>A considerable body of evidence as to rings and the virtues attributed to them has been collected by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Jones in his work <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Finger-ring Lore</i> (London, 1877). See also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. G.</abbr> Black, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-medicine</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 172⁠–⁠177.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1179" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1180" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Aulus Gellius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> 15. 8. See above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg014">14</a>.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1180" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1181" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Marcellinus on Hermogenes, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rhetores Graeci</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Walz, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 462; Sopater, <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 67.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1181" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1182" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Demosthenes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contra Androtion</i> 68, <abbr>p.</abbr> 614; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Foucart, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Culte de Dionysos en Attique</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 168.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1182" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1183" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Oldfield, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sketches from Nipal</i> (London, 1880), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 342 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1183" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1184" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Arrian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anabasis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 3; Quintus Curtius, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 1; Justin, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 7; Scholia on Euripides, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hippolytus</i>, 671.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1184" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1185" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Public talismans, on which the safety of the state was supposed to depend, were common in antiquity. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. A.</abbr> Lobeck, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aglaophamus</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, and my note on Pausanias, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 47. 5.<a href="chapter-2-5.xhtml#noteref-2-1185" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1186" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the primitive conception of the relation of names to persons and things, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Early History of Mankind</i>,<sup>3</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i> (Stuttgart, 1878), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 165 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Clodd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tom-tit-tot</i> (London, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 53 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 79 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> In what follows I have used with advantage the works of all these writers.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1186" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1187" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1891), <abbr>p.</abbr> 343.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1187" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1188" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 289.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1188" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1189" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Paloppo naar Posso,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlii</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 61 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1189" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1190" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Professor (Sir) <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys, “Welsh Fairies,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nineteenth Century</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (July-December 1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 566 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1190" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1191" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 377; compare <abbr>id.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 440.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1191" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1192" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 469, note.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1192" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1193" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among Cannibals</i> (London, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 280.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1193" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1194" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 736.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1194" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1195" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 133.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1195" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1196" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 46.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1196" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1197" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Bulmer, in Brough Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 94. The writer appears to mean that the natives feared they would die if anyone, or at any rate, an enemy, learned their real names.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1197" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1198" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 139; compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 637; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 584 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1198" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1199" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Lefébure, “La Vertu et la vie du nom en Égypte,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mélusine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1897) coll. 226 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1199" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1200" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mansfield Parkyns, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in Abyssinia</i> (London, 1868), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 301 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1200" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1201" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grihya Sûtras</i>, translated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Oldenberg, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50, 183, 395, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55, 215, 281; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Hillebrandt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vedische Opfer und Zauber</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46, 170 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Caland, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Altindisches Zauberritual</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162, note <sup>20</sup>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. C. J.</abbr> Ibbetson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Outlines of Punjáb Ethnography</i> (Calcutta, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 118; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folklore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 24, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 5; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natives of Northern India</i> (London, 1907), <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1201" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1202" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 109.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1202" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1203" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1203" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1204" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. J. B.</abbr> Bérenger-Féraud, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Peuples de la Sénégambie</i> (Paris, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 28.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1204" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1205" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Modigliani, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Un Viaggio a Nías</i> (Milan, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 465.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1205" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1206" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. C.</abbr> Hodson, “The <i>genna</i> amongst the Tribes of Assam,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 97.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1206" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1207" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> de Sabir, “Quelques notes sur les Manègres,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Vme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 51.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1207" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1208" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Schadenburg, “Die Bewohner von Süd-Mindanao und der Insel Samal,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 30.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1208" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1209" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. W.</abbr> van der Miesen, “Een en ander over Boeroe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 455; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Meerburg, “Proeve einer beschrijving van land en volk van Midden-Manggarai (West-Flores), Afdeeling Bima,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 465.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1209" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1210" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Kauffmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Balder</i> (Strasburg, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1210" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1211" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This I learned from my wife, who spent some years in Chili and visited the island of Chiloe.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1211" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1212" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. R.</abbr> Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Araucanians</i> (London, 1855), <abbr>p.</abbr> 222.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1212" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1213" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. F.</abbr> im Thurn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Indians of Guiana</i> (London, 1883), <abbr>p.</abbr> 220.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1213" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1214" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> Simons, “An Exploration of the Goajira Peninsula, U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> of Colombia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 790.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1214" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1215" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cullen, “The Darien Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1866) <abbr>p.</abbr> 265.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1215" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1216" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Pinart, “Les Indiens de l’État de Panama,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 44.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1216" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1217" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unknown Mexico</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 462.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1217" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1218" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The American Indians, their History, Condition, and Prospects</i> (Buffalo, 1851), <abbr>p.</abbr> 213. Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oneóta, or Characteristics of the Red Race of America</i> (New York and London, 1845), <abbr>p.</abbr> 456.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1218" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1219" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 217.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1219" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1220" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, “Notes upon the Religion of the Apache Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 423.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1220" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1221" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. S.</abbr> Galschet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Karankawa Indians, the Coast People of Texas</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archaeological and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum, Harvard University</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>No.</abbr> 2), <abbr>p.</abbr> 69.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1221" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1222" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes of California</i> (Washington, 1877), <abbr>p.</abbr> 315.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1222" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1223" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. B.</abbr> Grinnell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Blackfoot Lodge Tales</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 194.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1223" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1224" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1633, <abbr>p.</abbr> 3 (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1224" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1225" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Jones, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Ojebway Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. P.</abbr> Reid, “Religious Beliefs of the Ojibois or Sauteux Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1874) <abbr>p.</abbr> 107.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1225" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1226" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Great African Island</i> (London, 1880), <abbr>p.</abbr> 289.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1226" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1227" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. W.</abbr> Grainge, “Journal of a Visit to Mojanga on the North-West Coast,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 25 (reprint of the first four numbers, Antananarivo and London, 1885).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1227" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1228" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, “Medicine-men of the Apaches,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ninth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 461.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1228" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1229" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Mayne, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Four Years in British Columbia and Vancouver Island</i> (London, 1862), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1229" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1230" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Border with Crook</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 131 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1230" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1231" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Dobrizhoffer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia de Abiponibus</i> (Vienna, 1784), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 498.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1231" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1232" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 289.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1232" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1233" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 221. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. F.</abbr> Kohlbrugge, “Naamgeving in Insulinde,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 172 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The custom is reported for the British settlements in the Straits of Malacca by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Newbold (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Political and Statistical Account of the British Settlements in the Straits of Malacca</i>, London, 1839, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 176); for Sumatra in general by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Marsden (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Sumatra</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 286 <abbr>sq.</abbr>), and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 271); for the Battas by Baron van Hoëvell (“Iets over ‘t oorlogvoeren der Batta’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 436, note); for the Dyaks by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hupe (“Korte Verhandeling over de Godsdienst, Zeden, <abbr>enz.</abbr> der Dajakkers,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1846, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 250), and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i>, Philadelphia, 1902, <abbr>p.</abbr> 16); for the island of Sumba by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Roos (“Bijdrage tot de Kennis van Taal, Land en Volk op het Eiland Soemba,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 70, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>.); and for Bolang Mongondo, in the west of Celebes, by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. P.</abbr> Wilken and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Schwarz (“Allerlei over het land en volk van Bolaäng Mongondou,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1867) <abbr>p.</abbr> 356).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1233" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1234" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Chalmers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pioneering in New Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 187. If a Motumotu man is hard pressed for his name and there is nobody near to help him, he will at last in a very stupid way mention it himself.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1234" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1235" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Schellong, “Über Familienleben und Gebräuche der Papuas der Umgebung von Finschhafen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 12. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neu Guinea</i> (Berlin, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 172.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1235" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1236" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Gebruik van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 279. The Nufoors are a Papuan tribe on Doreh Bay, in Dutch New Guinea. See <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 287.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1236" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1237" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Graf Pfeil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Studien und Beobachtungen aus der Südsee</i> (Brunswick, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 78; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. A.</abbr> Kleintitschen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</i> (Hiltrup bei Münster, preface dated Christmas, 1906), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 237 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1237" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1238" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1238" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1239" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V. L.</abbr> Cameron, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Across Africa</i> (London, 1877), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 61.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1239" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1240" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. L.</abbr> Hinde and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Hinde, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Last of the Masai</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 48 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Uganda Protectorate</i> (London, 1902), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 826 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 56.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1240" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1241" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Reichard, “Die Wanjamuesi,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 258.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1241" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1242" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 29.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1242" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1243" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Torday and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. A.</abbr> Joyce, “Note on the Southern Ba-Mbala,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Man</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 81.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1243" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1244" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1244" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1245" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Weeks, “Anthropological Notes on the Bangala of the Upper Congo River,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1909) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 128, 459.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1245" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1246" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1246" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1247" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Childhood</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 73.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1247" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1248" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 545. Similarly among the Dacotas “there is no secrecy in children’s names, but when they grow up there is a secrecy in men’s names” (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 240).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1248" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1249" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Gebruik van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 278.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1249" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1250" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xl. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 273 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1250" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1251" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Mansveld (Kontroleur van Nias), “Iets over de namen en Galars onder de Maleijers in de Padangsche Bovenlanden, bepaaldelijk in noordelijk Agam,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1876) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 443, 449.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1251" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1252" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in the Forests of the Far East</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 208.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1252" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1253" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 202.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1253" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1254" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. A.</abbr> Waddell, “The Tribes of the Brahmapootra Valley,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 52, 69, compare 46.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1254" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1255" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Callaway, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religious System of the Amazulu</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 316, note.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1255" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1256" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 5 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 251.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1256" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1257" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 216⁠–⁠219; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, “On a Method of Investigating the Developement of Institutions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1889) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 248⁠–⁠250 (who refers to a series of papers by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, “Over de primitieve vormen van het huwelijk,” published in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indische Gids</i>, 1880, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which I have not seen). Wilken’s theory is rejected by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt (<abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>), who explains the custom by the fear of attracting the attention of evil spirits to the person named. Other explanations are suggested by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. F.</abbr> Kohlbrugge (“Naamgeving in Insulinde,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 160⁠–⁠170), and by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Crawley (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Mystic Rose</i>, London, 1902, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 428⁠–⁠433).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1257" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1258" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>For evidence of the custom of naming parents after their children in Australia, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery into Central Australia</i> (London, 1845), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 325 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: in Sumatra, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Marsden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Sumatra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 286; Baron van Hoëvell, “Iets over ‘t oorlogvoeren der Batta’s,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, N.S. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 436, note; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbeschrijving van Midden-Sumatra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 274: in Nias, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Nieuwenhuisen en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. C. B.</abbr> von Rosenberg, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 28 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. Batavia, 1863): in Java, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. J.</abbr> Veth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Java</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Haarlem, 1875) <abbr>p.</abbr> 642; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. F.</abbr> Kohlbrugge, “Die Tenggeresen, ein alter Javanischen Volksstamm,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 121; in Borneo, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hupe, “Korte Verhandeling over de Godsdienst, Zeden, <abbr>enz.</abbr> der Dajakkers,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indië</i>, 1846, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 249; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Low, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sarawak</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 249; Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in the Forests of the Far East</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 208; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. T. H.</abbr> Perelaer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Beschrijving der Dajaks</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hose, “The Natives of Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1894) <abbr>p.</abbr> 170; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore in Borneo</i> (Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899, privately printed), <abbr>p.</abbr> 26; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 55; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Nieuwenhuis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quer durch Borneo</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 75: among the Mantras of Malacca, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Blagden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 16 <abbr>sq.</abbr>: among the Negritos of Zambales in the Philippines, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. A.</abbr> Reed, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Negritos of Zambales</i> (Manilla, 1904), <abbr>p.</abbr> 55: in the islands between Celebes and New Guinea, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G. F.</abbr> Riedel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De sluik- en kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 5, 137, 152 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 238, 260, 353, 392, 418, 450; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. W.</abbr> van der Miesen, “Een en ander over Boeroe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 444; in Celebes and other parts of the Indian Archipelago, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. F.</abbr> Kohlbrugge, “Naamgeving in Insulinde,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lii</span>. (1901) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 160⁠–⁠170; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 216 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>: in New Guinea, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. W.</abbr> Schmidt, “Ethnographisches von Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 28: among the Kasias of Northeastern India, see <abbr>Col.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Yule, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 298; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. A.</abbr> Waddell, “The Tribes of the Brahmaputra Valley,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Calcutta, 1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 46: among some of the indigenous races of southern China, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Vial, “Les Gni ou Gnipa, tribu Lolote du Yun-Nan,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxv</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 270; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Mission lyonnaise d’exploration commerciale en Chine</i> (Lyons, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 369: in Corea, see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bishop, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Korea and her Neighbours</i> (London, 1898), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 136: among the Yukagirs of northeastern Asia, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Jochelson, “Die Jukagiren im äussersten Nordosten Asiens,” <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Jahresbericht der Geographischen Gesellschaft von Bern</i> (Bern, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> von Stenin, “Jochelson’s Forschungen unter den Jukagiren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxvi</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 169: among the Masai, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Merker, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Masai</i> (Berlin, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 59, 235: among the Bechuanas, Basutos, and other Caffre tribes of South Africa, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Livingston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa</i> (London, 1857), <abbr>p.</abbr> 126; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Shooter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kafirs of Natal</i> (London, 1857), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 220 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Leslie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</i><sup>2</sup> (Edinburgh, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 171 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; G. M’Call Theal, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kaffir Folk-lore</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 225; Father Porte, “Les reminiscences d’un missionaire du Basutoland,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 300: among the Hos of Togoland in West Africa, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Ewe-Stāmme</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 217: among the Patagonians, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. C.</abbr> Musters, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">At Home with the Patagonians</i> (London, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 177: among the Lengua Indians of the Gran Chaco, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kurze, “Sitten und Gebräuche der Lengua-Indianer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiii</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 28: among the Mayas of Guatemala, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 680: among the Haida Indians of Queen Charlotte Islands, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Swanton, “Contributions to the Ethnology of the Haida,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Leyden and New York, 1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 118: and among the Tinneh and occasionally the Thlinkeet Indians of northwest America, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Petitot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Monographie des Dènè-Dindjié</i> (Paris, 1876), <abbr>p.</abbr> 61; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. J.</abbr> Holmberg, “Ethnographische Skizzen über die Völker des russischen Amerika,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1856) <abbr>p.</abbr> 319.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1258" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1259" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Shooter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kafirs of Natal</i> (London, 1857), <abbr>p.</abbr> 221.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1259" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1260" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maclean, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Compendium of Kafir Laws and Customs</i> (Cape Town, 1866), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 92 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Leslie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 172; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Kranz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Natur- und Kulturleben der Zulus</i> (Wiesbaden, 1880), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 114 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; G. M’Call Theal, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kaffir Folk-lore</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 214; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Records of South-Eastern Africa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 435; Dudley Kidd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Essential Kafir</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 236⁠–⁠243; Father Porte, “Les reminiscences d’un missionaire du Basutoland,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 233.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1260" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1261" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Francis Fleming, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kaffraria and its Inhabitants</i> (London, 1853), <abbr>p.</abbr> 97; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Southern Africa</i> (London, 1856), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 238 <abbr>sq.</abbr> This writer states that the women are forbidden to pronounce “any word which may happen to contain a sound similar to anyone in the names of their nearest male relatives.”<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1261" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1262" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Maclean, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 93; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Leslie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</i>,<sup>2</sup> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46, 102, 172. The extensive system of taboos on personal names among the Caffres is known as <i>Ukuhlonipa</i>, or simply <i>hlonipa</i>. The fullest account of it with which I am acquainted is given by Leslie, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 141 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 172⁠–⁠180. See further Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Werner, “The Custom of <i>Hlonipa</i> in its Influence on Language,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the African Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 15 (April, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 346⁠–⁠356.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1262" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1263" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Central Africa</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 452.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1263" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1264" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Merensky, “Das Konde-volk im deutschen Gebiet am Nyassa-See,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie, und Urgeschichte</i>, 1893, <abbr>p.</abbr> (296).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1264" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1265" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Munzinger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ostafrikanische Studien</i> (Schaffhausen, 1864), <abbr>p.</abbr> 526; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sitten und Recht der Bogos</i> (Winterthur, 1859), <abbr>p.</abbr> 95.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1265" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1266" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Krause, “Merkwürdige Sitten der Haussa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 375.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1266" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1267" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Herodotus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 146.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1267" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1268" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Servius, on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 58.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1268" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1269" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Rhamm, “Der Verkehr der Geschlecter unter den Slaven in seinen gegensätzlichen Erscheinungen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 192.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1269" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1270" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Radloff, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Proben der Volkslitteratur der türkischen Stämme Süd-Sibiriens</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1870) <abbr>p.</abbr> 13, note 3.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1270" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1271" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ainu and their Folk-lore</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 226, 249 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 252.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1271" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1272" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Bringaud, “Les Karins de la Birmanie,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1888) <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1272" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1273" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Todas</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 626.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1273" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1274" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Thurston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographic Notes in Southern India</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 533.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1274" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1275" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Peter Jones, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Ojebway Indians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1275" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1276" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> James, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Expedition from Pittsburgh to the Rocky Mountains</i> (London, 1823), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 232.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1276" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1277" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. R.</abbr> Riggs, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dakota Grammar, Texts, and Ethnography</i> (Washington, 1893), <abbr>p.</abbr> 204.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1277" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1278" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes of California</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 315.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1278" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1279" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Willer, “Verzameling der Battasche Wetten en Instellingen in Mandheling en Pertibie,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, 1846, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 337 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1279" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1280" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Meerwaldt, “Gebruiken der Bataks in het maatschappelijk leven,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1905) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123, 125.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1280" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1281" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Neumann, “Kemali, Pantang en Rĕboe bij de Karo-Bataks,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 510.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1281" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1282" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hupe, “Korte Verhandeling over de Godsdienst, Zeden, <abbr>enz.</abbr> der Dajakkers,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Neêrlands Indie</i>, 1846, dl. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1282" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1283" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“De Dajaks op Borneo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1869) <abbr>p.</abbr> 78; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 599.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1283" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1284" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Shelford, “Two Medicine-baskets from Sarawak,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 78 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1284" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1285" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. C.</abbr> Schadee, “Bijdrage tot de kennis van den godsdienst der Dajaks van Landak en Tajan,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsche-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lvi</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 536.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1285" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1286" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, xl. (1896) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 273 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The word for taboo among these people is <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">kapali</i>. See further <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Eenige ethnographische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en Tomori,” <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 219, 237.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1286" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1287" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handleiding voor de vergelijkende Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 599 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1287" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1288" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A.</abbr> Wilken, “Bijdrage tot de Kennis der Alfoeren van het Eiland Boeroe,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 26 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>.). The words for taboo among these Alfoors are <i>poto</i> and <i>koin</i>; <i>poto</i> applies to actions, <i>koin</i> to things and places. The literal meaning of <i>poto</i> is “warm,” “hot” (Wilken, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 25).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1288" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1289" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. W.</abbr> van der Miesen, “Een en ander over Boeroe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 455.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1289" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1290" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. P.</abbr> Wilken and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Schwarz, “Allerlei over het Land en Volk van Bolaäng Mongondou,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1867) <abbr>p.</abbr> 356.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1290" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1291" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. F. H.</abbr> Campen, “De godsdienstbegrippen der Halmaherasche Alfoeren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 450.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1291" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1292" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K. F.</abbr> Holle, “Snippers van den Regent van Galoeh,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1882) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The precise consequence supposed to follow is that the <i>oebi</i> (?) plantations would have no bulbs (<i>geen knollen</i>). The names of several animals are also tabooed in Sunda. See below, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg415">415</a>.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1292" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1293" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>p.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg332">332</a>.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1293" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1294" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Gebruik van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 278 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The writer explains that “to eat well” is a phrase used in the sense of “to be decent, well-behaved,” “to know what is customary.”<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1294" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1295" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neu-Guinea</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 171 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1295" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1296" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 92. For more evidence of the observance of this custom in German New Guinea see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Schellong, “Über Familienleben und Gebräuche der Papuas der Umgebung von Finschhafen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 12; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> Erdweg, “Die Bewohner der Insel Tumleo, Berlinhafen, Deutsch-Neu-Guinea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Anthropologischen Gesellschaft in Wien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 379 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1296" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1297" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. A.</abbr> Hely, “Notes on Totemism, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, among the Western Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British New Guinea, Annual Report for 1894⁠–⁠95</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 54 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neu-Guinea</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 313 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1297" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1298" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1298" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1299" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hahl, “Über die Rechtsanschauungen der Eingeborenen eines Teiles der Blanchebucht und des Innern der Gazelle Halbinsel,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 80; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">O.</abbr> Schellong, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1889) <abbr>p.</abbr> 12.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1299" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1300" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P. A.</abbr> Kleintitschen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Küstenbewohner der Gazellehalbinsel</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 190, 238.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1300" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1301" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> W. O’Ferrall, “Native Stories from Santa Cruz and Reef Islands,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiv</span>. (1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 223 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1301" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1302" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, “Mœurs et superstitions de la tribu Belep,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1880) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 30, 68; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i> (Nouméa, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 94 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1302" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1303" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Codrington, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 43 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1303" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1304" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 339.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1304" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1305" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29. Specimens of this peculiar form of speech are given by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dawson. For example, “It will be very warm by and by” was expressed in the ordinary language <i>Baawan kulluun</i>; in “turn tongue” it was <i>Gnullewa gnatnæn tirambuul</i>.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1305" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1306" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Joseph Parker, in Brough Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 156.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1306" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1307" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macgillivray, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Voyage of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. M. S.</abbr> Rattlesnake</i> (London, 1852), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 10 <abbr>sq.</abbr> It is obvious that the example given by the writer does not illustrate his general statement. Apparently he means to say that Nuki is the son-in-law, not the son, of the woman in question, and that the prohibition to mention the names of persons standing in that relationship is mutual.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1307" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1308" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> James Smith, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Booandik Tribe</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1308" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1309" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Stewart, in <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 461.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1309" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1310" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Schürmann, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i> (Adelaide, 1879), <abbr>p.</abbr> 249.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1310" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1311" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 27, 30 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 40. So among the Gowmditch-mara tribe of western Victoria the child spoke his father’s language, and not his mother’s, when she happened to be of another tribe (Fison and Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 276). Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 250 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1311" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1312" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Hale, “On the Sakais,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 291.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1312" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1313" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Coudreau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La France équinoxiale</i> (Paris, 1887), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 178.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1313" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1314" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De Rochefort, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire naturelle et morale des Iles Antilles de l’Amérique</i><sup>2</sup> (Rotterdam, 1665), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 349 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; De la Borde, “Relation de l’origine, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, des Caraibs sauvages des Isles Antilles de l’Amérique,” <abbr>pp.</abbr> 4, 39 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Recueil de divers voyages faits en Afrique et en Amérique, qui n’ont point esté encore publiez</i>, Paris, 1684); Lafitau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs des sauvages ameriquains</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 55. On the language of the Carib women see also Jean Baptiste du Tertre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire generale des Isles de <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Christophe, de la Guadeloupe, de la Martinique et autres dans l’Amérique</i> (Paris, 1654), <abbr>p.</abbr> 462; Labat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nouveau Voyage aux isles de l’Amérique</i> (Paris, 1713), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 127 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. N.</abbr> Rat, “The Carib Language,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1898) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 311 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1314" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1315" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Sapper, “Mittelamericanische Caraiben,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 56 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; and my article, “A Suggestion as to the Origin of Gender in Language,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fortnightly Review</i>, January 1900, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 79⁠–⁠90; also <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 237 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1315" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1316" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Ehrenreich, “Materialien zur Sprachenkunde Brasiliens,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1894) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 23⁠–⁠35.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1316" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1317" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Strabo, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span> 4. 8, <abbr>p.</abbr> 503.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1317" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1318" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Grey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West and Western Australia</i> (London, 1841), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 232, 257. The writer is here speaking especially of western Australia, but his statement applies, with certain restrictions which will be mentioned presently, to all parts of the continent. For evidence see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the English Colony in New South Wales</i> (London, 1804), <abbr>p.</abbr> 390; Hueber, “À travers l’Australie,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Vme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>. (1865) <abbr>p.</abbr> 429; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Gason, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 275; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 120, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 297; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L. P.</abbr> Cameron, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 363; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 88, 338, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 195, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 22, 29, 139, 166, 596; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. D.</abbr> Lang, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Queensland</i> (London, 1861), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 367, 387, 388; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among Cannibals</i> (London, 1889), <abbr>p.</abbr> 279; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report on the Work of the Horn Scientific Expedition to Central Australia</i> (London and Melbourne, 1896), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 137, 168. More evidence is adduced below.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1318" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1319" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On this latter motive see especially the remarks of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 249. Compare also <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Schurmann, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 247; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Bonney, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 127.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1319" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1320" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Oldfield, “The Aborigines of Australia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1865) <abbr>p.</abbr> 238.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1320" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1321" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Oldfield, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 240.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1321" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1322" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Stanbridge, “On the Aborigines of Victoria,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1861) <abbr>p.</abbr> 299.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1322" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1323" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, “On some Australian Beliefs,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 191; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 440.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1323" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1324" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 469.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1324" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1325" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 94.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1325" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1326" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 498.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1326" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1327" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 526.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1327" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1328" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Clement, “Ethnographical Notes on the Western Australian Aborigines,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Internationales Archiv für Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 9.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1328" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1329" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. H.</abbr> Morgan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">League of the Iroquois</i> (Rochester, U.S., 1851), <abbr>p.</abbr> 175.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1329" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1330" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. S.</abbr> Gatschett, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Klamath Indians of South-Western Oregon</i> (Washington, 1890) (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contributions to North American Ethnology</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> pt. 1), <abbr>p.</abbr> xli; Chase, quoted by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 357, note 76.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1330" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1331" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes of California</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 33; compare <abbr>p.</abbr> 68.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1331" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1332" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 240.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1332" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1333" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> Simons, “An Exploration of the Goajira Peninsula, U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> of Colombia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 791.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1333" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1334" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Dobrizhoffer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia de Abiponibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 301, 498. For more evidence of the observance of this taboo among the American Indians see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Woldt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Captain Jacobsen’s Reise an der Nordwestküste Americas</i> (Leipzig, 1884), <abbr>p.</abbr> 57 (as to the Indians of the northwest coast); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Colquhoun Grant, “Description of Vancouver’s Island,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1857) <abbr>p.</abbr> 303 (as to Vancouver Island); <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Wilson, “Report on the Indian Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Ethnological Society of London</i>, N.S., <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1866) <abbr>p.</abbr> 286 (as to Vancouver Island and neighbourhood); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hill Tout, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxv</span>. (1905) <abbr>p.</abbr> 138; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Far West, the Land of the Salish and Déné</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 201; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Ross, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adventures on the Oregon or Columbia River</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 322; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 226 (as to the Bonaks of California); Ch. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Bell, “The Mosquito Territory,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1862) <abbr>p.</abbr> 255; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Pinart, “Les Indiens de l’Etat de Panama,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 56; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. C.</abbr> Musters, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. (1871) <abbr>p.</abbr> 68 (as to Patagonia). More evidence is adduced below.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1334" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1335" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">P.S.</abbr> Pallas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise durch verschiedene Provinzen des russischen Reichs</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 76 (Samoyeds); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Breeks, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the Primitive Tribes and Monuments of the NÄ«lagiris</i> (London, 1873), <abbr>p.</abbr> 19; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Marshall, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels amongst the Todas</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 177; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H. R.</abbr> Rivers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Todas</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 462, 496, 626; Plan de Carpin (de Plano Carpini), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation des Mongols ou Tartares</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> D’Avezac, cap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. § <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>.; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Duveyrier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Exploration du Sahara, les Touareg du nord</i> (Paris, 1864), <abbr>p.</abbr> 415; <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. C.</abbr> Holland, “The Ainos,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1874) <abbr>p.</abbr> 238; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Batchelor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ainu and their Folk-lore</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 252, 564; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. M.</abbr> Hildebrandt, “Ethnographische Notizen über Wakamba und ihre Nachbarn,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1878) <abbr>p.</abbr> 405; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Blumentritt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Versuch einer Ethnographie der Philippinen</i> (Gotha, 1882), <abbr>p.</abbr> 38 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermann’s Mittheilungen, Ergänzungsheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 67); <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Fontana, “On the Nicobar Isles,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Asiatick Researches</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (London, 1799) <abbr>p.</abbr> 154; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore in Borneo</i> (Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 26; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 70 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Calder, “Native Tribes of Tasmania,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1874) <abbr>p.</abbr> 23; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Bonwick, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Daily Life of the Tasmanians</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 97, 145, 183.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1335" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1336" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Duveyrier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Exploration du Sahara, les Touareg du nord</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 431.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1336" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1337" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1337" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1338" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Komm herüber und hilf uns!</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Barmen, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 24; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nachrichten über Kaiser Wilhelms-Land und den Bismarck-Archipel</i>, 1897, <abbr>p.</abbr> 92.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1338" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1339" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Loria, “Notes on the ancient War Customs of the Natives of Logea,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British New Guinea, Annual Report for 1894⁠–⁠95</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 45, 46 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Krieger, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Neu-Guinea</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 322.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1339" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1340" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Myron Eels, “The Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of Washington Territory,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 656.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1340" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1341" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Baron <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. C.</abbr> von der Decken, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen in Ost-Afrika</i> (Leipzig, 1869⁠–⁠1871), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 25; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Andree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Parallelen und Vergleiche</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 182 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1341" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1342" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. L.</abbr> Hinde and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Hinde, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The last of the Masai</i> (London, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 50; Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Johnston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Uganda Protectorate</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 826.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1342" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1343" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyatt, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 165.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1343" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1344" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Collins, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the English Colony in New South Wales</i> (London, 1804), <abbr>p.</abbr> 392.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1344" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1345" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Beveridge, “Notes on the Dialects, Habits, and Mythology of the Lower Murray Aborigines,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Royal Society of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 20 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1345" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1346" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Description of the Natives of King George’s Sound (Swan River) and adjoining Country,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Geographical Society</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1832) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 46 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1346" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1347" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. E.</abbr> Roth, <i>North Queensland Ethnography, Bulletin <abbr>No.</abbr> 5</i> (Brisbane, 1903), § 72, <abbr>p.</abbr> 20.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1347" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1348" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Angas, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</i> (London, 1847), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 228.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1348" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1349" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Lafitau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs des sauvages ameriquains</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 434; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Southey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Brazil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 894 (referring to Roger Williams).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1349" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1350" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Charlevoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 109.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1350" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1351" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Powers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes of California</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 349; Myron Eels, “The Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of Washington Territory,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institute for 1887</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 656.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1351" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1352" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. L.</abbr> Hinde and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Hinde, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Last of the Masai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 50.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1352" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1353" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1353" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1354" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 248. Compare K. F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Baer und Gr. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. Helmersen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beiträge zur Kenntniss des russischen Reiches und der angränzenden Länder Asiens</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1839), <abbr>p.</abbr> 108 (as to the Kenayens of Cook’s Inlet and the neighbourhood).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1354" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1355" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventeenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 231.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1355" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1356" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> de Azara, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages dans l’Amérique Méridionale</i> (Paris, 1808), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 153 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1356" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1357" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Lozano, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Descripcion chorographica</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">del Gran Chaco</i> (Cordova, 1733), <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1357" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1358" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Man, “Notes on the Nicobarese,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 261. Elsewhere I have suggested that mourning costume in general may have been adopted with this intention. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1886) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 73, 98 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1358" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1359" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Enderli, “Zwei Jahre bei den Tchuktschen und Korjaken,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermanns Mitteilungen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlix</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 257.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1359" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1360" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Brough Smyth, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 266.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1360" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1361" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Eyre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of Expeditions of Discovery</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 354 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1361" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1362" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macgillivray, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the Voyage of H.M.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Rattlesnake</i> (London, 1852), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 10 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1362" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1363" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Bulmer, in Brough Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aborigines of Victoria</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 94.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1363" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1364" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. E. A.</abbr> Meyer, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 199, compare <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1364" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1365" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 43. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howitt mentions the case of a native who arbitrarily substituted the name <i>nobler</i> (“spirituous liquor”) for <i>yan</i> (“water”) because Yan was the name of a man who had recently died (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kamilaroi and Kurnai</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 249).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1365" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1366" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Dobrizhoffer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia de Abiponibus</i> (Vienna, 1784), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 199, 301.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1366" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1367" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Ten Kate, “Notes ethnographiques sur les Comanches,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1367" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1368" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Calendar History of the Kiowa Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventeenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 231.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1368" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1369" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe in a letter to me dated Mengo, Uganda, 17th February 1904.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1369" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1370" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Masai</i> (Oxford, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 304 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to the Masai customs in this respect see also above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg354">354</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg356">356</a>.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1370" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1371" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. W.</abbr> van der Miesen, “Een en ander over Boeroe,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 455.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1371" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1372" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir William Macgregor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British New Guinea</i> (London, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 79.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1372" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1373" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. G.</abbr> Seligmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Melanesians of British New Guinea</i> (Cambridge, 1910), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 629⁠–⁠631.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1373" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1374" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. W.</abbr> Christian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Caroline Islands</i> (London, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 366.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1374" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1375" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. A.</abbr> de Roepstorff, “Tiomberombi, a Nicobar Tale,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">liii</span>. (1884) pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>pp.</abbr> 24 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In some tribes apparently the names of the dead are only tabooed in the presence of their relations. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Hill-Tout, in “Report of the Committee on the Ethnological Survey of Canada,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the British Association for the Advancement of Science</i>, Bradford, 1900, <abbr>p.</abbr> 484; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Brown, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Melanesians and Polynesians</i> (London, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 399. But in the great majority of the accounts which I have consulted no such limitation of the taboo is mentioned.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1375" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1376" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. S.</abbr> Gatschet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Klamath Indians of South-Western Oregon</i> (Washington, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xli</span>. (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Contributions to North American Ethnology</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> pt. I).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1376" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1377" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Beveridge, “Of the Aborigines inhabiting the great Lacustrine and Riverine Depression of the Lower Murray,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of New South Wales for 1883</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 65. The custom of changing common words on the death of persons who bore them as their names seems also to have been observed by the Tasmanians. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Bonwick, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Daily Life of the Tasmanians</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 145.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1377" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1378" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Grey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journals of two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West and Western Australia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 231 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1378" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1379" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Dawson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Australian Aborigines</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1379" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1380" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. W.</abbr> Schürmann, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 247.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1380" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1381" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 156.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1381" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1382" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Myron Eels, “The Twana, Chemakum, and Klallam Indians of Washington Territory,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Report of the Smithsonian Institution for 1887</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 656.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1382" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1383" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>S. R. M’Caw, “Mortuary Customs of the Puyallups,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The American Antiquarian and Oriental Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 235.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1383" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1384" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Lafitau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs des sauvages ameriquains</i> (Paris, 1724), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 434. Charlevoix merely says that the taboo on the names of the dead lasted “a certain time” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la Nouvelle France</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 109). “A good long while” is the phrase used by Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Bourke in speaking of the same custom among the Apaches (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">On the Border with Crook</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 132).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1384" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1385" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Gabriel Sagard, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Grand Voyage du pays des Hurons</i>, Nouvelle Édition (Paris, 1865), <abbr>p.</abbr> 202. The original edition of Sagard’s book was published at Paris in 1632.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1385" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1386" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relations des Jésuites</i>, 1636, <abbr>p.</abbr> 131; <abbr>id.</abbr>, 1642, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 53, 85; <abbr>id.</abbr>, 1644, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 66 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (Canadian reprint, Quebec, 1858).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1386" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1387" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Daniel <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Harmon, quoted by <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Jedidiah Morse, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report to the Secretary of War of the United States on Indian Affairs</i> (New-Haven, 1822), Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 345. The custom seems now to be extinct. It is not mentioned by Father <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. G.</abbr> Morice in his accounts of the tribe (in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Proceedings of the Canadian Institute</i>, Third Series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 1888⁠–⁠89; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Transactions of the Canadian Institute</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 1892⁠–⁠93; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annual Archaeological Report</i>, Toronto, 1905).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1387" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1388" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Wilkes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition</i> (New York, 1851), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 453.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1388" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1389" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. J.</abbr> Jessen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Finnorum Lapponumque Norwegicorum religione pagana</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 33 <abbr>sq.</abbr> (bound up with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque lingua, vita, et religione pristina commentatio</i>, Copenhagen, 1767).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1389" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1390" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Major <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. C.</abbr> Macpherson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Service in India</i> (London, 1865), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1390" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1391" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Spiess, “Einiges über die Bedeutung der Personennamen der Evheer in Togo-Gebiete,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen des Seminars für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1903) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 56 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1391" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1392" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 152; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 153 <abbr>sq.</abbr> In the former passage the writer says nothing about the child’s name. In the latter he merely says that an ancestor is supposed to have sent the child, who accordingly commonly takes the name of that ancestor. But the analogy of other peoples makes it highly probable that, as <abbr>Col.</abbr> Ellis himself states in his later work (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Yoruba-speaking Peoples</i>), the ancestor is believed to be incarnate in the child. That the Yoruba child takes the name of the ancestor who has come to life again in him is definitely stated by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Dieterich in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archiv für Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 20, referring to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Missionskunde und Religionswissenschaft</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 17, a work to which I have not access. Dieterich’s account of the subject of rebirth (<abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 18⁠–⁠21) deserves to be consulted.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1392" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1393" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “Further Notes on the Manners and Customs of the Baganda,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 32.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1393" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1394" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Mauch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reisen im Inneren von Süd-Afrika</i> (Gotha, 1874), <abbr>p.</abbr> 43 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Petermann’s Mittheilungen, Ergänsungsheft</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 37).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1394" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1395" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. C.</abbr> Temple, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Census of India, 1901</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 207, 212.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1395" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1396" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Plan de Carpin (de Plano Carpini), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation des Mongols ou Tartares</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> D’Avezac, cap. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. § <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. The writer’s statement (“<i xml:lang="la">nec nomen proprium ejus usque ad tertiam generationem audet aliquis nominare</i>”) is not very clear.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1396" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1397" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Labbé, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Un Bagne russe, l’île de Sakhaline</i> (Paris, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 166.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1397" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1398" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 363 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 365, 368, 371, 377, 379, 424 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1398" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1399" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On the doctrine of the reincarnation of ancestors in their descendants see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. B.</abbr> Tylor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Primitive Culture</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 3⁠–⁠5, who observes with great probability that “among the lower races generally the renewal of old family names by giving them to newborn children may always be suspected of involving some such thought.” See further <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 297⁠–⁠299.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1399" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1400" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. H.</abbr> Bancroft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Races of the Pacific States</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 248.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1400" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1401" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Taplin, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 19.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1401" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1402" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. E. A.</abbr> Meyer, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1402" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1403" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Some of the Indians of Guiana bring food and drink to their dead so long as the flesh remains on the bones; when it has mouldered away, they conclude that the man himself has departed. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Biet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage de la France équinoxiale en l’Isle de Cayenne</i> (Paris, 1664), <abbr>p.</abbr> 392. The Alfoors or Toradjas of central Celebes believe that the souls of the dead cannot enter the spirit-land until all the flesh has been removed from their bones; till that has been done, the gods (<i>lamoa</i>) in the other world could not bear the stench of the corpse. Accordingly at a great festival the bodies of all who have died within a certain time are dug up and the decaying flesh scraped from the bones. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 26, 32 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Het wezen van het Heidendom te Posso,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 32. The Matacos Indians of the Gran Chaco believe that the soul of a dead man does not pass down into the nether world until his body is decomposed or burnt. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Pelleschi, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Los Indios Matacos</i> (Buenos Aires, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 102. These ideas perhaps explain the widespread custom of disinterring the dead after a certain time and disposing of their bones otherwise.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1403" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1404" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 498⁠–⁠508.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1404" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1405" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. B.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 98 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1405" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1406" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Cecchi, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Da Zeila alle frontiere del Caffa</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Rome, 1885) <abbr>p.</abbr> 551.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1406" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1407" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, “The Bahima,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span>. (1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 96.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1407" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1408" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> Cunningham, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Uganda and its Peoples</i> (London, 1905), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 14, 16.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1408" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1409" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>De la Loubere, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Du royaume de Siam</i> (Amsterdam, 1691), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 306; Pallegoix, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Royaume Thai ou Siam</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 260.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1409" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1410" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S.</abbr> Polack, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners and Customs of the New Zealanders</i> (London, 1840), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 127, note 43.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1410" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1411" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Fytche, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Burma Past and Present</i> (London, 1878), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 238.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1411" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1412" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Edkins, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Religion in China</i><sup>2</sup> (London, 1878), <abbr>p.</abbr> 35.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1412" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1413" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Dallet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de l’Église de Corée</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>.; <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bishop, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Korea and her Neighbours</i> (London, 1898), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 48. The custom is now obsolete (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. N.</abbr> Curzon, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Problems of the Far East</i>, Westminster, 1896, <abbr>p.</abbr> 155 note).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1413" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1414" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notice sur le Cambodge</i> (Paris, 1875), <abbr>p.</abbr> 22; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Cambodge</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 58.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1414" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1415" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K. F.</abbr> Holle, “Snippers van den Regent van Galoeh,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1882) <abbr>p.</abbr> 101.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1415" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1416" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N. P.</abbr> Wilken en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A.</abbr> Schwarz, “Allerlei over het land en volk van Bolaäng Mongondou,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1867) <abbr>p.</abbr> 356.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1416" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1417" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Roos, “Bijdrage tot de Kennis van Taal, Land, en Volk op het eiland Soemba,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 70, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H. F.</abbr> Kohlbrugge, “Naamgeving in Insulinde,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsche-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 173.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1417" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1418" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg335">335</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1418" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1419" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Shooter, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kafirs of Natal and the Zulu Country</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 221 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; David Leslie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Zulus and Amatongas</i><sup>2</sup> (Edinburgh, 1875), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 172⁠–⁠179; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, “Manners, Customs, Superstitions, and Religions of South African Tribes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 131. The account in the text is based mainly on Leslie’s description, which is by far the fullest.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1419" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1420" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Tyerman and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Bennet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of Voyages and Travels</i> (London, 1831), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 525 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Great African Island</i> (London, 1880), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 150 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Curiosities of Words connected with Royalty and Chieftainship,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, No. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (Christmas, 1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 308 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>. (1887) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 226 <abbr>sqq.</abbr> On the custom of tabooing royal or chiefly names in Madagascar, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 104 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1420" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1421" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">V.</abbr> Noel, “Île de Madagascar, recherches sur les Sakkalava,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), IIme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1843) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 303⁠–⁠306. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Grandidier, “Les Rites funéraires chez les Malgaches,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 224; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Walen, “The Sakalava,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., Reprint of the Second Four Numbers (Antananarivo, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 242; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> van Gennep, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tabou et totémisme à Madagascar</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 110 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Amongst the Sakalavas it is forbidden to mention the name of any dead person. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Voeltzkow, “Vom Morondava zum Mangoky, Reiseskizzen aus West-Madagascar,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 118.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1421" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1422" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Baron, “The Bara,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., Reprint of the Second Four Numbers (Antananarivo, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 83.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1422" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1423" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Grandidier, “Madagascar,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</i> (Paris), Vme Série, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1869) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 401 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The writer is here speaking specially of the Sakalavas, though his remarks appear to be of general application.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1423" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1424" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. S.</abbr> Polack, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners and Customs of the New Zealanders</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 37 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 126 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Tregear, “The Maoris of New Zealand,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 123.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1424" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1425" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Cook, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages</i> (London, 1809), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 155 (Third Voyage). Compare Captain James Wilson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missionary Voyage to the Southern Pacific Ocean</i> (London, 1799), <abbr>p.</abbr> 366; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Ellis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polynesian Researches</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 101.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1425" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1426" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Vancouver, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage of Discovery to the North Pacific Ocean and round the World</i> (London, 1798), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 135.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1426" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1427" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">United States Exploring Expedition, Ethnography and Philology</i>, by Horatio Hale (Philadelphia, 1846), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 288 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1427" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1428" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Brown, D.D., <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Melanesians and Polynesians</i> (London, 1910), <abbr>p.</abbr> 280.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1428" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1429" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lexiphanes</i>, 10. The inscriptional and other evidence of this Greek superstition was first brought to the notice of anthropologists by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R.</abbr> Paton in an interesting article, “The Holy Names of the Eleusinian Priests,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">International Folk-lore Congress, 1891, Papers and Transactions</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 202⁠–⁠214. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Maass, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Orpheus</i> (Munich, 1895), <abbr>p.</abbr> 70; <abbr>Aug.</abbr> Mommsen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Feste der Stadt Athen im Altertum</i> (Leipzig, 1898), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 253⁠–⁠255; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Foucart, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Grands Mystères d’Eleusis</i> (Paris, 1900), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 28⁠–⁠31. The two last writers show that, contrary to what we might have expected, the custom appears not to have been very ancient.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1429" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1430" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Kaibel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Epigrammata Graeca ex lapidibus conlecta</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 863; Ἐφημερὶς ἀρχαιολογική, 1883, col. 79 <abbr>sq.</abbr> From the latter of these inscriptions we learn that the name might be made public after the priest’s death. Further, a reference of Eunapius (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vitae sophistarum</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 475 of the Didot edition) shows that the name was revealed to the initiated. In the essay cited in the preceding note <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. R.</abbr> Paton assumes that it was the new and sacred name which was kept secret and committed to the sea. The case is not clear, but both the evidence and the probability seem to me in favour of the view that it was rather the old everyday name of the priest or priestess which was put away at his or her consecration. If, as is not improbable, these sacred personages had to act the parts of gods and goddesses at the mysteries, it might well be deemed indecorous and even blasphemous to recall the vulgar names by which they had been known in the familiar intercourse of daily life. If our clergy, to suppose an analogous case, had to personate the most exalted beings of sacred history, it would surely be grossly irreverent to address them by their ordinary names during the performance of their solemn functions.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1430" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1431" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Seidel, “Der Yew’e Dienst im Togolande,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für afrikanische und oceanische Sprachen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1897) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 161⁠–⁠173; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Klose, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Togo unter deutscher Flagge</i> (Berlin, 1899), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 197⁠–⁠205. Compare <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Herold, “Bericht betreffend religiöse Anschauungen und Gebräuche der deutschen Ewe-Neger,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen aus den deutschen Schutzgebieten</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 146; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Spieth, “Der Jehve Dienst der Evhe-Neger,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 83⁠–⁠88; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Spiess, “Religionsbegriffe der Evheer in Westafrika,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen des Seminars für orientalische Sprachen zu Berlin</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1903) Dritte Abtheilung, <abbr>p.</abbr> 126.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1431" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1432" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Spencer and Gillen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Tribes of Central Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 227.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1432" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1433" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Timkowski, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels of the Russian Mission through Mongolia to China</i> (London, 1827), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 348.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1433" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1434" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in South Africa, Second Journey</i> (London, 1822), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 204 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1434" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1435" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Rascher, “Die Sulka, ein Beitrag zur Ethnographie Neu-Pommern,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Archiv für Anthropologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span>. (1904) <abbr>p.</abbr> 216. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Parkinson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dreissig Jahre in der Südsee</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 198.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1435" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1436" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Washington Matthews, “The Mountain Chant, a Navajo Ceremony,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fifth Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1887), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 386 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1436" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1437" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. H.</abbr> Morgan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">League of the Iroquois</i> (Rochester, U.S., 1851), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 167 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The writer derives the prohibition to tell tales of wonder in summer “from a vague and indefinable dread.”<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1437" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1438" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 314, 492.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1438" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1439" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Vetter, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mittheilungen der Geographischen Gesellschaft zu Jena</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 95; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Komm herüber und hilf uns!</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Barmen, 1898) <abbr>p.</abbr> 26; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Hagen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unter den Papuas</i> (Wiesbaden, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 270. On myths or magical tales told as spells to produce the effects which they describe, compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Kauffmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Balder</i> (Strasburg, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 299 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Fossey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Magie assyrienne</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 95⁠–⁠97.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1439" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1440" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Fr.</abbr> Boas, “The Social Organization and the Secret Societies of the Kwakiutl Indians,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report of the U.<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> National Museum for 1895</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 396, 418 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 503, 504. Compare <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Totemism and Exogamy</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 333 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 517 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1440" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1441" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Xenophanes, quoted by Eusebius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Praeparatio Evangelii</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span> 13, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 269 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Heinichen, and by Clement of Alexandria, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Stromateis</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 4, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 840 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Potter; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Diels, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker</i><sup>2</sup> (Berlin, 1906⁠–⁠1910), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 49.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1441" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1442" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 359⁠–⁠362; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wiedemann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Religion der alten Ägypter</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 29⁠–⁠32; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire ancienne des peuples de l’Orient classique: les origines</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 162⁠–⁠164; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. V.</abbr> Lanzone, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dizionario di mitologia egizia</i> (Turin, 1881⁠–⁠1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 818⁠–⁠822; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. A.</abbr> Wallis Budge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Book of the Dead</i> (London, 1895), <abbr>pp.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxix</span>.-xci.; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Egyptian Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 136 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Gods of the Egyptians</i> (London, 1904), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 360 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The abridged form of the story given in the text is based on a comparison of these various versions, of which Erman’s is slightly, and Maspero’s much curtailed. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Budge’s version is reproduced by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Clodd (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tom Tit Tot</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 180 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>).<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1442" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1443" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Maspero, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Études de mythologie et d’archéologie égyptienne</i> (Paris, 1893), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 297 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1443" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1444" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Lefébure, “La Vertu et la vie du nom en Égypte,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mélusine</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1897) coll. 227 <abbr>sq.</abbr> Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Erman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ägypten und ägyptisches Leben im Altertum</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 472 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. A.</abbr> Wallis Budge, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Egyptian Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 157 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1444" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1445" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Lucan, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pharsalia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span> 730 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1445" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1446" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Lane, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</i> (Paisley and London, 1895), ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 273.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1446" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1447" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Doutté, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magie et religion dans l’Afrique du nord</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 130.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1447" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1448" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (Leyden, 1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 1126.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1448" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1449" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 18; Macrobius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 9; Servius on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 351; Plutarch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quaestiones Romanae</i> 61. According to Servius (<abbr>loc. cit.</abbr>) it was forbidden by the pontifical law to mention any Roman god by his proper name, lest it should be profaned. Compare Festus, <abbr>p.</abbr> 106, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller: “<i xml:lang="la">Indigetes dii quorum nomina vulgari non licet.</i>” On the other hand the Romans were careful, for the sake of good omen, to choose men with lucky names, like Valerius, Salvius, Statorius, to open any enterprise of moment, such as to lead the sacrificial victims in a religious procession or to be the first to answer to their names in a levy or a census. See Cicero, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De divinatione</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 45. 102 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Festus, <abbr>s. v.</abbr> “Lacus Lucrinus,” <abbr>p.</abbr> 121, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Müller; Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span> 22; Tacitus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historiae</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 53.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1449" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1450" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Pliny, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naturalis Historia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 65; Solinus, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 4 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; Macrobius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Saturnalia</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 9, 3, and 5; Servius, on Virgil, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aeneid</i> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 277; Joannes Lydus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De mensibus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> 50.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1450" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1451" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Fossey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Magie assyrienne</i> (Paris, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58, 95.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1451" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1452" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> de Pauly, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description ethnographique des peuples de la Russie</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1862), <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peuples ouralo-altaïques</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 24.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1452" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1453" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Martin, “Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,” in Pinkerton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyages and Travels</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 579 <abbr>sq.</abbr> As to the Flannan Islands see also Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sinclair’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Statistical Account of Scotland</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (Edinburgh, 1797), <abbr>p.</abbr> 283.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1453" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1454" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Superstitions of the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1900), <abbr>p.</abbr> 239.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1454" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1455" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Miss Morag Cameron, “Highland Fisher-folk and their Superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 304.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1455" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1456" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Edmonston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zetland Islands</i> (Edinburgh, 1809), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 74.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1456" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1457" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Rogers, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Life in Scotland</i> (Edinburgh, 1884⁠–⁠1886), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 218.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1457" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1458" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Gregor, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 199⁠–⁠201.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1458" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1459" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Traditions, Customs, and Superstitions of the Lewis,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 170; Miss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Goodrich-Freer, “The Powers of Evil in the Outer Hebrides,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span>. (1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 265.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1459" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1460" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mackenzie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ten Years north of the Orange River</i> (Edinburgh, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 151, note 1.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1460" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1461" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Campbell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Witchcraft and Second Sight in the Highlands and Islands of Scotland</i> (Glasgow, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 184 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1461" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1462" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Rhys, “Manx Folk-lore and Superstitions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (1892) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1462" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1463" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bosquet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">La Normandie romanesque et merveilleuse</i> (Paris and Rouen, 1845), <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1463" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1464" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Gmelin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reise durch Sibirien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Göttingen, 1752), <abbr>p.</abbr> 277<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1464" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1465" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bavaria, Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs Bayern</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Munich, 1863), <abbr>p.</abbr> 304.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1465" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1466" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Tettau und Temme, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Volkssagen Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</i> (Berlin, 1837), <abbr>p.</abbr> 281.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1466" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1467" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Witzschel, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sagen, Sitten, und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 175, § 30.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1467" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1468" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K.</abbr> Bartsch, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sagen, Märchen, und Gebräuche aus Meklenburg</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 246, §§ 1273, 1274.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1468" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1469" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Märkische Sagen und Märchen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 378, § 14.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1469" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1470" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Thorpe, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Northern Mythology</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 83 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L.</abbr> Lloyd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peasant Life in Sweden</i> (London, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 251.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1470" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1471" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. F.</abbr> Kaindl, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Huzulen</i> (Vienna, 1894), <abbr>p.</abbr> 103; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Viehzucht und Viehzauber in den Ostkarpaten,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 387.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1471" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1472" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, “Neue Beiträge zur Ethnologie und Volkskunde der Huzulen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxix</span>. (1896) <abbr>p.</abbr> 73.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1472" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1473" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Leemius, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Lapponibus Finmarchiae eorumque lingua, vita, et religione pristina commentatio</i> (Copenhagen, 1767), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 502 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1473" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1474" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. A.</abbr> Castren, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vorlesungen über die finnische Mythologie</i> (<abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg, 1853), <abbr>p.</abbr> 201.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1474" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1475" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Varonen, reported by <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Abercromby in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (1891) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 245 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1475" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1476" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der Ehsten abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und Gewohnheiten</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 120.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1476" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1477" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> Labbé, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Un Bagne russe, l’île de Sakhaline</i> (Paris, 1903), <abbr>p.</abbr> 231.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1477" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1478" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. W.</abbr> Steller, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beschreibung von dem Lande Kamtschatka</i> (Frankfurt and Leipzig, 1774), <abbr>p.</abbr> 276.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1478" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1479" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. W.</abbr> Steller, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 91; compare <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129, 130.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1479" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1480" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Seventh Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnology</i> (Washington, 1892), <abbr>p.</abbr> 352. Compare <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Myths of the Cherokee,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 295.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1480" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1481" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. W.</abbr> Nelson, “The Eskimo about Bering Strait,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1899) <abbr>p.</abbr> 438.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1481" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1482" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Boas, “The Eskimo of Baffin Land and Hudson Bay,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 148.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1482" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1483" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Teit, “The Thompson Indians of British Columbia,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the American Museum of Natural History, The Jesup North Pacific Expedition</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. (April 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 374.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1483" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1484" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Wellhausen, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reste arabischen Heidentums</i><sup>2</sup> (Berlin, 1897), <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1484" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1485" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Certeux et <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. H.</abbr> Carnoy, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">L’Algérie traditionnelle</i> (Paris and Algiers, 1884), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 172, 175.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1485" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1486" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Picarda, “Autour de Mandéra,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Missions Catholiques</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xviii</span>. (1886) <abbr>p.</abbr> 227.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1486" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1487" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J.</abbr> Monteiro, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Angola and the River Congo</i> (London, 1875), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 116.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1487" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1488" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mackenzie, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ten Years north of the Orange River</i> (Edinburgh, 1871), <abbr>p.</abbr> 151; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. R.</abbr> Conder, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>. (1887) <abbr>p.</abbr> 84.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1488" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1489" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. B.</abbr> Johnstone, “Notes on the Customs of the Tribes occupying Mombasa Sub-district, British East Africa,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 268.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1489" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1490" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. J. M.</abbr> de Groot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Religious System of China</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (Leyden, 1907) <abbr>p.</abbr> 691.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1490" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1491" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. F.</abbr> Mockler-Ferryman, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">British Nigeria</i> (London, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 285.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1491" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1492" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Irle, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Herero</i> (Gütersloh, 1906), <abbr>p.</abbr> 133.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1492" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1493" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i> (Oxford, 1909), <abbr>p.</abbr> 43.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1493" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1494" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. F.</abbr> Standing, “Malagasy <i>fady</i>,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reprint of the Second Four Numbers</i> (Antananarivo, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 258.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1494" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1495" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. F.</abbr> Standing, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 263.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1495" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1496" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Great African Island</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 307 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1496" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1497" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Nassau, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fetichism in West Africa</i> (London, 1904), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 381 <abbr>sqq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1497" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1498" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Panjab Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 15, § 122.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1498" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1499" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 104, § 690.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1499" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1500" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 133, § 372.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1500" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1501" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 142 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1501" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1502" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S.</abbr> Mateer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Life in Travancore</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 320 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1502" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1503" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 133, § 372.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1503" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1504" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 212.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1504" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1505" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">North Indian Notes and Queries</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 70, § 579; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 249; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Religion and Folk-lore of Northern India</i> (Westminster, 1896), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 54.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1505" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1506" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tribes and Castes of the North-Western Provinces and Oudh</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 314.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1506" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1507" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Sunder, “Exorcism of Wild Animals in the Sundarbans,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxii</span> part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. (Calcutta, 1904) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 45 <abbr>sqq.</abbr>, 51.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1507" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1508" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Mouhot, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Travels in the Central Parts of Indo-China</i> (London, 1864), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 263 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1508" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1509" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Mgr Masson, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annales de la Propagation de la Foi</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1852) <abbr>p.</abbr> 323. Compare Le <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. P.</abbr> Cadière, “Croyances et dictons populaires de la vallée du Nguôn-son,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 134.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1509" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1510" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Young, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Kingdom of the Yellow Robe</i> (Westminster, 1898), <abbr>p.</abbr> 61.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1510" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1511" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Annandale, “Primitive Beliefs and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (April 1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 104.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1511" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1512" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes sur le Laos</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 113; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage dans le Laos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 311. In the latter passage the writer observes that the custom of giving conventional names to common objects is very generally observed in Indo-China during the prosecution of long and perilous journeys undertaken periodically.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1512" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1513" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Id.</abbr>, “Les Tchames et leurs religions,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue de l’Histoire des Religions</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span>. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 278. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Cabaton, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nouvelles Recherches sur les Chams</i> (Paris, 1901), <abbr>p.</abbr> 53.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1513" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1514" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D. F. A.</abbr> Hervey, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Notes and Queries</i> (December 1886), <abbr>p.</abbr> 45, § 154.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1514" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1515" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><i>Pantang</i> is equivalent to taboo. In this sense it is used also by the Dyaks. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. W.</abbr> Tromp, “Een Dajaksch Feest,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 31 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1515" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1516" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. R.</abbr> Logan, “The Orang Binua of Johore,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Eastern Archipelago and Eastern Asia</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1847) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 249, 263⁠–⁠265; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Bastian, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Völker des östlichen Asien</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> 37; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Lake and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. J.</abbr> Kelsall, “The Camphor Tree and Camphor Language of Johore,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 26 (January 1894), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 39 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 212⁠–⁠214; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. O.</abbr> Blagden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula</i> (London, 1906), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 414⁠–⁠431.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1516" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1517" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. M.</abbr> Pleyte, “Herinneringen uit Oost-Indië,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het koninklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 27 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1517" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1518" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore in Borneo</i> (Wallingford, Pennsylvania, 1899; privately printed), <abbr>p.</abbr> 27; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i> (Philadelphia, 1902), <abbr>p.</abbr> 17. A special language is also used in the search for camphor by some of the natives of Sumatra. See Th. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> Heyting, “Beschrijving der onder-afdeeling Groot-Mandeling en Batang-Natal,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, Tweede Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span>. (1897) <abbr>p.</abbr> 276.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1518" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1519" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 168 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1519" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1520" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 250, 253⁠–⁠260. In like manner the people of Sikhim intensely dread all mining operations, believing that the ores and veins of metals are the stored treasures of the earth-spirits, who are enraged by the removal of these treasures and visit the robbers with sickness, failure of crops, and other calamities. Hence the Sikhimese leave the copper mines to be worked by Nepaulese. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. A.</abbr> Waddell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Among the Himalayas</i> (Westminster, 1899), <abbr>p.</abbr> 101.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1520" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1521" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 139 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1521" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1522" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 192 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1522" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1523" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Annandale, “Primitive Beliefs and Customs of the Patani Fishermen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fasciculi Malayenses, Anthropology</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (April 1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 84⁠–⁠86.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1523" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1524" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Snouck Hurgronje, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Atjèhers</i> (Batavia and Leyden, 1893⁠–⁠1894), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 303.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1524" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1525" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. L.</abbr> van der Toorn, “Het animisme bij den Minangkabauer der Padangsche Bovenlanden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1890) <abbr>p.</abbr> 100. As to the superstitions of gold-washers among the Gayos of Sumatra, see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Snouck Hurgronje, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Het Gajoland en zijne Bewoners</i> (Batavia, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 361 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1525" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1526" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. T. H.</abbr> Perelaer, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ethnographische Beschrijving der Dajaks</i> (Zalt-Bommel, 1870), <abbr>p.</abbr> 215.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1526" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1527" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. T.</abbr> Nieuwenhuisen en <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. C. B.</abbr> von Rosenberg, “Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>. (1863) <abbr>p.</abbr> 115. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Marsden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Sumatra</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 292; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T. J.</abbr> Newbold, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Account of the British Settlements in the Straits of Malacca</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 192 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1527" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1528" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. E.</abbr> Neumann, “<i>Kemali</i>, <i>Pantang</i> en <i>Rèboe</i> bij de Karo-Bataks,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlviii</span>. (1906) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 511 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1528" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1529" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Snouck Hurgronje, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Het Gajoland en zijne Bewoners</i> (Batavia, 1903), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 311 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1529" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1530" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Thomas, “De jacht op het eiland Nias,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 275.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1530" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1531" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. N. H. A.</abbr> Chatelin, “Godsdienst en bijgeloof der Niassers,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. (1880) <abbr>p.</abbr> 165; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Sundermann, “Die Insel Nias und die Mission daselbst,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 349; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Modigliani, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Un Viaggio a Nias</i> (Milan, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 593.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1531" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1532" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. L.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Nota, betreffende de rijstcultuur in de Residentie Tapanoeli,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1893) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 525 <abbr>sq.</abbr> The Singhalese also call things by strange names when they are in the rice-fields. See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. A.</abbr> Perera, “Glimpses of Singhalese Social Life,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Antiquary</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1903) <abbr>p.</abbr> 437.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1532" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1533" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. A. J.</abbr> Hazeu, “Kleine Bijdragen tot de Ethnografie en de Folk-lore van Java,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlvii</span>. (1903) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 291 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1533" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1534" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 146⁠–⁠148; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Eenige ethnografische aanteekeningen omtrent de Toboengkoe en de Tomori,” <abbr>ibid.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 228 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1534" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1535" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">N.</abbr> Adriani und <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Van Posso naar Mori,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1900) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 145 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1535" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1536" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Regen lokken en regen verdrijven bij de Toradja’s van Midden Celebes,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xliv</span>. (1901) <abbr>p.</abbr> 8; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Het rijk Mori,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift van het Koniklijk Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Serie, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>. (1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 464, note.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1536" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1537" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B. F.</abbr> Matthes, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</i> (The Hague, 1875), <abbr>p.</abbr> 107; <abbr>id.</abbr>, “Over de <i>âdá</i>’s of gewoonten der Makassaren en Boegineezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Verslagen en Mededeelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen</i>, Afdeeling Letterkunde, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. Reeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. (Amsterdam, 1885) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 164 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1537" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1538" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. E. D.</abbr> Engelhard, “Mededeelingen over het eiland Saleijer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Neêrlandsch-Indië</i>, Vierde Volgreeks, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 369.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1538" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1539" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. F.</abbr> Jochim, “Beschrijving van den Sapoedi Archipel,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvi</span>. (1893) <abbr>p.</abbr> 361.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1539" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1540" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 508.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1540" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1541" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. D.</abbr> van de Velde van Cappellan, “Verslag eener Bezoekreis naar de Sangi-eilanden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1857) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 33, 35.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1541" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1542" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Kruijt, “Een en ander aangaande het geestelijk en maatschappelijk leven van den Poso-Alfoer,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mededeelingen van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 148.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1542" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1543" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Th. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. F.</abbr> van Hasselt, “Gebruik van vermomde Taal door de Nufooren,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1902) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 279 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1543" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1544" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">K. F.</abbr> Holle, “Snippers van den Regent van Galoeh,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvii</span>. (1882) <abbr>pp.</abbr> 101 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1544" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1545" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Hose and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> McDougall, “The Relations between Men and Animals in Sarawak,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 205; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. H.</abbr> Furness, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Home-life of Borneo Head-hunters</i> (Philadelphia, 1902), <abbr>pp.</abbr> 17, 186 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1545" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1546" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Hose and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> McDougall, <abbr>op. cit.</abbr> <abbr>p.</abbr> 186.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1546" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1547" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Ch. Brooke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ten Years in Sarawak</i> (London, 1866), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 208; Spenser <abbr>St.</abbr> John, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life in the Forests of the Far East</i>,<sup>2</sup> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 71 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1547" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1548" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Juan de la Concepcion, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Historia general de Philipinas</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Manilla, 1788), <abbr>p.</abbr> 20. Compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mallat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Les Philippines</i> (Paris, 1846), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 64.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1548" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1549" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>On this subject <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. J.</abbr> Wilkinson’s account of the Malay’s attitude to nature (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Beliefs</i>, London and Leyden, 1906, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 67 <abbr>sq.</abbr>) deserves to be quoted: “The practice of magic arts enters into every department of Malay life. If (as the people of the Peninsula believe) all nature is teeming with spiritual life, some spiritual weapon is necessary to protect man against possible ghostly foes. Now the chief and most characteristic weapon of the Malay in his fight against the invisible world is courtesy. The peasant will speak no evil of a tiger in the jungle or of an evil spirit within the limits of that spirit’s authority.⁠ ⁠… The tiger is the symbol of kingly oppression; still, he is royal and must not be insulted; he is the ‘shaggy-haired father’ or ‘grandfather’ of the traveller in the woods. Even the birds, the fish and the fruits that serve as human food are entitled to a certain consideration: the deer is addressed as a ‘prince,’ the coconut tree as a ‘princess,’ the chevrotin as ‘emperor of the jungle’ (<i>shah alam di-rimba</i>). In all this respect paid to unseen powers⁠—for it is the soul of the animal or plant that is feared⁠—there is no contemptible adulation or cringeing; the Malay believes that courtesy honours the speaker more than the person addressed.”<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1549" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1550" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>The character of King Solomon appears to be a favourite one with the Malay sorcerer when he desires to ingratiate himself with or lord it over the powers of nature. Thus, for example, in addressing silver ore the sage observes:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“If you do not come hither at this very moment<br/>
						You shall be a rebel unto God,<br/>
						And a rebel unto God’s Prophet Solomon,<br/>
						For I am God’s Prophet Solomon.”⁠—</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. W.</abbr> Skeat, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Malay Magic</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 273. No doubt the fame of his wisdom has earned for the Hebrew monarch this distinction among the dusky wizards of the East.<a href="chapter-2-6.xhtml#noteref-2-1550" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1551" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“The mind of the savage is not a blank; and when one becomes familiar with his beliefs and superstitions, and the complicated nature of his laws and customs, preconceived notions of his simplicity of thought go to the winds. I have yet to find that most apocryphal of beings described as the ‘unsophisticated African.’ We laugh at and ridicule his fetishes and superstitions, but we fail to follow the succession of ideas and effort of mind which have created these things. After most careful observations extending over nineteen years, I have come to the conclusion that there is nothing in the customs and fetishes of the African which does not represent a definite course of reasoning” (<abbr>Rev.</abbr> Thomas Lewis, “The Ancient Kingdom of Kongo,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Geographical Journal</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 554). “The study of primitive peoples is extremely curious and full of surprises. It is twenty years since I undertook it among the Thonga and Pedi tribes of South Africa, and the further I advance, the more I am astonished at the great number, the complexity, and the profundity of the rites of these so-called savages. Only a superficial observer could accuse their individual or tribal life of superficiality. If we take the trouble to seek the reason of these strange customs, we perceive that at their base there are secret, obscure reasons, principles hard to grasp, even though the most fervent adepts of the rite can give no account of it. To discover these principles, and so to give a true explanation of the rites, is the supreme task of the ethnographer⁠—a task in the highest degree delicate, for it is impossible to perform it if we do not lay aside our personal ideas to saturate ourselves with those of primitive peoples” (<abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains et leurs tabous,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 126). These weighty words, the fruit of ripe experience, deserve to be pondered by those who fancy that the elaborate system of savage custom can have grown up instinctively without a correspondingly elaborate process of reasoning in the minds of its founders. We may not, indeed, always be able to discover the reason for which a particular custom or rite was instituted, for we are only beginning to understand the mind of uncivilised man; but all that we know of him tends to show that his practice, however absurd it may seem to us, originated in a definite train of thought and for a definite and very practical purpose.<a href="chapter-2-7.xhtml#noteref-2-1551" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1552" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See above, <abbr>pp.</abbr> <a class="tei tei-ref" href="#Pg159">159</a> <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1552" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1553" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M. J.</abbr> van Baarda, “Fabelen, Verhalen en Overleveringen der Galelareezen,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bijdragen tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch-Indië</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xlv</span>. (1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 513.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1553" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1554" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>John Ramsay, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Scotland and Scotsmen in the Eighteenth Century</i> (Edinburgh, 1888), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 456.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1554" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1555" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. R.</abbr> Schoolcraft, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Indian Tribes</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 175.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1555" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1556" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Macdonald, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Light in Africa</i> (London, 1890), <abbr>p.</abbr> 209.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1556" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1557" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Anthropological Institute</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>. (1902) <abbr>p.</abbr> 59.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1557" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1558" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. C.</abbr> Hollis, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Nandi</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 24 <abbr>sq.</abbr>, 36. In these cases the harm is thought to fall on the person who steps over, not on the thing which is stepped over.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1558" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1559" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. H.</abbr> Weeks, “Customs of the Lower Congo People,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>. (1909) <abbr>p.</abbr> 474.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1559" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1560" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Gutmann, “Trauer und Begräbnissitten der Wadschagga,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxix</span>. (1906) <abbr>p.</abbr> 199.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1560" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1561" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Aymonier, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voyage dans le Laos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Paris, 1895) <abbr>p.</abbr> 144.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1561" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1562" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C.</abbr> Lumholtz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Unknown Mexico</i> (London, 1903), <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 435.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1562" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1563" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr> Curr, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Australian Race</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 50.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1563" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1564" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A. W.</abbr> Howitt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Native Tribes of South-East Australia</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 402.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1564" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1565" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Father Lambert, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mœurs et superstitions des Néo-Calédoniens</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 192 <abbr>sq.</abbr><a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1565" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1566" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">P.</abbr> von Stenin, “Das Gewohnheitsrecht der Samojeden,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Globus</i>, lx. (1891) <abbr>p.</abbr> 173.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1566" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1567" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Richardson, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antananarivo Annual and Madagascar Magazine</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reprint of the First Four Numbers</i> (Antananarivo, 1885), <abbr>p.</abbr> 529; <abbr>id.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reprint of the Second Four Numbers</i> (Antananarivo, 1896), <abbr>p.</abbr> 296; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Sibree, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Great African Island</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 288; compare De Flacourt, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Histoire de la grande isle Madagascar</i> (Paris, 1658), <abbr>p.</abbr> 99.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1567" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1568" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Mooney, “Myths of the Cherokee,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nineteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology</i>, pt. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (Washington, 1900) <abbr>p.</abbr> 424.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1568" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1569" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. A.</abbr> Junod, “Les Conceptions physiologiques des Bantou sud-africains,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Revue d’Ethnographie et de Sociologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 138, note <sup>3</sup>.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1569" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1570" epub:type="endnote">
					<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F. S.</abbr> Krauss, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksglaube und religiöser Brauch der Südslaven</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 52.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1570" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2-1571" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>See <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">L. F.</abbr> Sauvé, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Folk-lore des Hautes-Vosges</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 226, compare <abbr>pp.</abbr> 219 <abbr>sq.</abbr>; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Monseur, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Le Folk-lore Wallon</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 39; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Wuttke, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</i>,<sup>2</sup> § 603; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. W.</abbr> Wolf, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <abbr>p.</abbr> 208, § 42; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. A. E.</abbr> Köhler, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Volksbrauch</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">im Voigtlande</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 423; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Kuhn und <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Schwartz, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 462, § 461; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E.</abbr> Krause, “Abergläubische Kuren und sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift für Ethnologie</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>. (1883) <abbr>p.</abbr> 85; <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Kaindl, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Die Huzulen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5; J. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Grohmann, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Aberglauben und Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 109, §§ 798, 799; Eijüb Abēla, “Beiträge zur Kenntniss abergläubischer Gebräuche in Syrien,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zeitschrift des deutschen Palästina-Vereins</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>. (1884) <abbr>p.</abbr> 81; compare <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">B.</abbr> Chemali, “Naissance et premier âge au Liban,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anthropos</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. (1910) <abbr>p.</abbr> 741.<a href="appendix-2.xhtml#noteref-2-1571" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
