<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface to the Second Edition</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="preface-4-2" epub:type="preface">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Preface to the Second Edition</h3>
				<p>In this second edition some minor corrections have been made and some fresh matter added. Where my views appear to have been misunderstood, I have endeavoured to state them more clearly; where they have been disputed, I have carefully reconsidered the evidence and given my reasons for adhering to my former opinions. Most of the additions thus made to the volume are comprised in a new chapter (“Sacred Men and Women”), a new section (“Influence of Mother-kin on Religion”), and three new appendices (“Moloch the King,” “The Widowed Flamen,” and “Some Customs of the Pelew Islanders”). Among the friends and correspondents who have kindly helped me with information and criticisms of various sorts I wish to thank particularly <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Crooke, Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. M.</abbr> Flinders Petrie, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G. F.</abbr> Hill of the British Museum, the Reverend <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Roscoe of the Church Missionary Society, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Wyse. Above all I owe much to my teacher the Reverend Professor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R. H.</abbr> Kennett, who, besides initiating me into the charms of the Hebrew language and giving me a clearer insight into the course of Hebrew history, has contributed several valuable suggestions to the book and enhanced the kindness by reading and criticizing some of the proofs.</p>
				<footer>
					<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature"><abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J. G.</abbr> Frazer.</p>
					<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">Trinity College, Cambridge, <time datetime="1907-09-22">22nd September 1907</time>.</p>
				</footer>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
